docs/dev/archive/E2EE_IMPLEMENTATION_NOTES.md, before:

# E2EE Implementation Notes

**Technical documentation for developers working on MMRelay's End-to-End Encryption implementation.**

## Unified E2EE Status System

As of the latest implementation, MMRelay uses a centralized E2EE status detection system located in `src/mmrelay/e2ee_utils.py`. This provides consistent E2EE status reporting across all components.

### Key Components

- **`get_e2ee_status(config, config_path)`**: Single source of truth for E2EE capabilities
- **`format_room_list(rooms, e2ee_status)`**: Consistent room listing with encryption warnings
- **`get_room_encryption_warnings(rooms, e2ee_status)`**: Warning generation for problematic setups
- **Standardized message templates**: Consistent error messages and fix instructions

### E2EE Status States

- **`ready`**: E2EE fully configured and operational
- **`disabled`**: E2EE disabled in configuration
- **`unavailable`**: Platform doesn't support E2EE (Windows)
- **`incomplete`**: Missing dependencies or credentials

### Room Display Logic

- **E2EE Ready**: `🔒 Room Name - Encrypted` / `✅ Room Name`
- **E2EE Disabled**: `⚠️ Room Name - Encrypted (E2EE disabled - messages will be blocked)` / `✅ Room Name`
- **E2EE Unavailable**: `⚠️ Room Name - Encrypted (E2EE unavailable on Windows)` / `✅ Room Name`

## Core E2EE Implementation Logic

The final working E2EE implementation relies on five critical components to function correctly.

### 1. Correct Client Initialization and Session Restoration

Analysis of several working `matrix-nio` bots (`matrix-commander`, `matrix-nio-send`) revealed that the library handles loading the E2EE store implicitly when the `store_path` is provided during client construction. Manually calling `client.load_store()` is unnecessary when using `client.restore_login()` and can interfere with the client's internal state.

The correct sequence is:

1. Initialize `AsyncClient`, providing `homeserver`, `user_id`, `device_id`, and `store_path` in the constructor.
2. Call `client.restore_login()` to inject the access token. This method implicitly loads the E2EE store. **Note:** `restore_login` requires a concrete `device_id`; passing `None` is not supported by matrix-nio. If the device_id is unknown, first set `access_token`/`user_id`, call `whoami()` to discover the device_id, then invoke `restore_login` with that value.
3. Call `client.keys_upload()` if `client.should_upload_keys` is true.
4. Begin syncing.

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# In connect_matrix()

# Initialize the client with all necessary parameters
matrix_client = AsyncClient(
    homeserver=matrix_homeserver,
    user=bot_user_id,
    device_id=e2ee_device_id,
    store_path=e2ee_store_path if e2ee_enabled else None,
    config=client_config,
    ssl=ssl_context,
)

# Restore the login. nio implicitly loads the store based on store_path.
if credentials:
    matrix_client.restore_login(
        user_id=bot_user_id,
        device_id=e2ee_device_id,
        access_token=matrix_access_token,
    )

# Upload keys if needed, now that we are authenticated.
if e2ee_enabled and matrix_client.should_upload_keys:
    await matrix_client.keys_upload()
```

### 2. Initial Sync with Full State

To correctly identify encrypted rooms at startup, the initial sync with the homeserver **must** be performed with `full_state=True`. A lightweight sync (`full_state=False`) does not provide the necessary `m.room.encryption` state events, causing the client to incorrectly treat encrypted rooms as unencrypted.

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# In connect_matrix()
sync_response = await asyncio.wait_for(
    matrix_client.sync(
        timeout=MATRIX_EARLY_SYNC_TIMEOUT, full_state=True
    ),
    timeout=MATRIX_SYNC_OPERATION_TIMEOUT,
)
```

### 3. Robust Callback Handling for Encrypted Messages

A single callback for all message types is not sufficient to handle the nuances of E2EE. The final implementation uses two separate callbacks for handling encrypted messages:

- **`on_room_message`**: This callback is registered for `RoomMessageText` and other decrypted event types. It is only triggered after a message has been successfully decrypted by `matrix-nio`.
- **`on_decryption_failure`**: This new, dedicated callback is registered for `MegolmEvent`. It is triggered when an encrypted message is received but cannot be decrypted (usually due to a missing key).

**Registration (`src/mmrelay/main.py`):**

```python
# Register the callback for successfully decrypted messages
matrix_client.add_event_callback(
    on_room_message,
    (RoomMessageText, RoomMessageNotice, RoomMessageEmote, ReactionEvent),
)
# Register the dedicated callback for decryption failures
matrix_client.add_event_callback(on_decryption_failure, (MegolmEvent,))
```

### 4. Automatic Key Requesting on Decryption Failure

When the `on_decryption_failure` callback is triggered, it is not enough to simply log the error. The client must actively request the missing decryption key from other clients in the room.

The implementation now monkey-patches the `event.room_id` (which was found to be unreliable) and then uses the standard `event.as_key_request()` method to create and send the `m.room_key_request`.

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# In on_decryption_failure(room, event)
try:
    # Monkey-patch the event object with the correct room_id from the room object
    event.room_id = room.room_id

    request = event.as_key_request(
        matrix_client.user_id, matrix_client.device_id
    )
    await matrix_client.to_device(request)
    logger.info(f"Requested keys for failed decryption of event {event.event_id}")
except Exception as e:
    logger.error(f"Failed to request keys for event {event.event_id}: {e}")
```

### 5. Outgoing Message Formatting (`formatted_body` fix)

A validation error in `matrix-nio`'s event parser was triggered when the relay sent a plain-text message and later received it back from the server. The parser would incorrectly create a `formatted_body: None` field, which failed schema validation.

To work around this, all outgoing `m.room.message` events of `msgtype: "m.text"` sent by `matrix_relay` now **always** include a `format` and `formatted_body` key. For plain-text messages, the `body` and `formatted_body` are identical.

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# In matrix_relay()
content = {
    "msgtype": "m.text",
    "body": plain_body,
    # ... other keys
}

# Always add format and formatted_body to avoid nio validation errors
content["format"] = "org.matrix.custom.html"
content["formatted_body"] = formatted_body
```

### 6. Internal Same-Account Device Verification Workaround

`matrix-nio` does not currently handle the full `m.key.verification.request` flow automatically for this use case. To prevent the "Encrypted by a device not verified by its owner" shield for MMRelay's own account, MMRelay now registers a dedicated to-device callback that drives the SAS flow internally:

1. Receive `m.key.verification.request` from the same Matrix account.
2. Send `m.key.verification.ready`.
3. Accept `m.key.verification.start`.
4. Confirm the SAS when `m.key.verification.key` arrives.
5. Send `m.key.verification.done` after a verified MAC.

This is intentionally scoped to same-account events only (`event.sender == client.user_id`) to avoid auto-verifying external users/devices.

Configuration:

- `matrix.e2ee.self_verify` (preferred)
- `matrix.encryption.self_verify` (legacy alias)
- Default: `true` when E2EE is enabled

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# connect_matrix()
await _perform_matrix_login(client, auth_info)
self_verification_enabled = _is_internal_self_verification_enabled(
    matrix_section, e2ee_enabled
)
_register_internal_self_verification_callback(client, self_verification_enabled)

# to-device handler (simplified):
if event_type == "m.key.verification.request":
    await client.to_device(m_key_verification_ready)
elif event_type == "m.key.verification.start":
    await client.accept_key_verification(tx_id)
elif event_type == "m.key.verification.key":
    await client.confirm_short_auth_string(tx_id)
elif event_type == "m.key.verification.mac" and sas.verified:
    await client.to_device(m_key_verification_done)
```

## Summary of E2EE Flow

1.  **Startup**: The client is initialized with the E2EE store path. It authenticates using `restore_login()`, which implicitly loads the store. Keys are uploaded if needed.
2.  **Verification Hook**: When E2EE is enabled, a to-device callback is registered to handle same-account key verification events (`request/ready/start/key/mac/done`).
3.  **Sync**: The client performs a `sync(full_state=True)`, learning which rooms are encrypted.
4.  **Outgoing Message**: `matrix_relay` sends a message from Meshtastic to Matrix. It is correctly encrypted by `nio` because the room's encrypted state is known. The message content includes a `formatted_body` to prevent parser errors.
5.  **Incoming Encrypted Message**: A `MegolmEvent` is received.
    - **If decryption succeeds**: `nio` automatically generates a `RoomMessageText` event. `on_room_message` is triggered, and the decrypted message is relayed to Meshtastic.
    - **If decryption fails**: `nio` fires the `MegolmEvent` callback. `on_decryption_failure` is triggered. The bot logs the error and sends out an `m.room_key_request`.
6.  **Key Arrival**: The key request is received by other clients, who send the key back in a `m.forwarded_room_key` to-device event. `nio` automatically processes this key and stores it.
7.  **Decryption Retry**: The next time the client syncs, it can now decrypt the original message it failed on. The `RoomMessageText` callback will be fired, and the message will be processed.

Commit message:

feat(e2ee): add proactive self-verification for existing sessions
Add _maybe_initiate_internal_self_verification function that proactively
starts same-account device verification for other unverified devices at
startup. This complements the passive handling of incoming verification
requests by initiating verification with existing sessions.

The implementation includes:
- whoami sanity check to confirm current session identity
- Key query to ensure device list is up-to-date
- Filtering of already-verified devices and active SAS sessions
- Proper tracking of initiated verification transactions
- Flushing queued to-device messages after verification start/accept

docs/dev/archive/E2EE_IMPLEMENTATION_NOTES.md, after:

# E2EE Implementation Notes

**Technical documentation for developers working on MMRelay's End-to-End Encryption implementation.**

## Unified E2EE Status System

As of the latest implementation, MMRelay uses a centralized E2EE status detection system located in `src/mmrelay/e2ee_utils.py`. This provides consistent E2EE status reporting across all components.

### Key Components

- **`get_e2ee_status(config, config_path)`**: Single source of truth for E2EE capabilities
- **`format_room_list(rooms, e2ee_status)`**: Consistent room listing with encryption warnings
- **`get_room_encryption_warnings(rooms, e2ee_status)`**: Warning generation for problematic setups
- **Standardized message templates**: Consistent error messages and fix instructions

### E2EE Status States

- **`ready`**: E2EE fully configured and operational
- **`disabled`**: E2EE disabled in configuration
- **`unavailable`**: Platform doesn't support E2EE (Windows)
- **`incomplete`**: Missing dependencies or credentials

### Room Display Logic

- **E2EE Ready**: `🔒 Room Name - Encrypted` / `✅ Room Name`
- **E2EE Disabled**: `⚠️ Room Name - Encrypted (E2EE disabled - messages will be blocked)` / `✅ Room Name`
- **E2EE Unavailable**: `⚠️ Room Name - Encrypted (E2EE unavailable on Windows)` / `✅ Room Name`

## Core E2EE Implementation Logic

The final working E2EE implementation relies on five critical components to function correctly.

### 1. Correct Client Initialization and Session Restoration

Analysis of several working `matrix-nio` bots (`matrix-commander`, `matrix-nio-send`) revealed that the library handles loading the E2EE store implicitly when the `store_path` is provided during client construction. Manually calling `client.load_store()` is unnecessary when using `client.restore_login()` and can interfere with the client's internal state.

The correct sequence is:

1. Initialize `AsyncClient`, providing `homeserver`, `user_id`, `device_id`, and `store_path` in the constructor.
2. Call `client.restore_login()` to inject the access token. This method implicitly loads the E2EE store. **Note:** `restore_login` requires a concrete `device_id`; passing `None` is not supported by matrix-nio. If the device_id is unknown, first set `access_token`/`user_id`, call `whoami()` to discover the device_id, then invoke `restore_login` with that value.
3. Call `client.keys_upload()` if `client.should_upload_keys` is true.
4. Begin syncing.

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# In connect_matrix()

# Initialize the client with all necessary parameters
matrix_client = AsyncClient(
    homeserver=matrix_homeserver,
    user=bot_user_id,
    device_id=e2ee_device_id,
    store_path=e2ee_store_path if e2ee_enabled else None,
    config=client_config,
    ssl=ssl_context,
)

# Restore the login. nio implicitly loads the store based on store_path.
if credentials:
    matrix_client.restore_login(
        user_id=bot_user_id,
        device_id=e2ee_device_id,
        access_token=matrix_access_token,
    )

# Upload keys if needed, now that we are authenticated.
if e2ee_enabled and matrix_client.should_upload_keys:
    await matrix_client.keys_upload()
```

### 2. Initial Sync with Full State

To correctly identify encrypted rooms at startup, the initial sync with the homeserver **must** be performed with `full_state=True`. A lightweight sync (`full_state=False`) does not provide the necessary `m.room.encryption` state events, causing the client to incorrectly treat encrypted rooms as unencrypted.

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# In connect_matrix()
sync_response = await asyncio.wait_for(
    matrix_client.sync(
        timeout=MATRIX_EARLY_SYNC_TIMEOUT, full_state=True
    ),
    timeout=MATRIX_SYNC_OPERATION_TIMEOUT,
)
```

### 3. Robust Callback Handling for Encrypted Messages

A single callback for all message types is not sufficient to handle the nuances of E2EE. The final implementation uses two separate callbacks for handling encrypted messages:

- **`on_room_message`**: This callback is registered for `RoomMessageText` and other decrypted event types. It is only triggered after a message has been successfully decrypted by `matrix-nio`.
- **`on_decryption_failure`**: This new, dedicated callback is registered for `MegolmEvent`. It is triggered when an encrypted message is received but cannot be decrypted (usually due to a missing key).

**Registration (`src/mmrelay/main.py`):**

```python
# Register the callback for successfully decrypted messages
matrix_client.add_event_callback(
    on_room_message,
    (RoomMessageText, RoomMessageNotice, RoomMessageEmote, ReactionEvent),
)
# Register the dedicated callback for decryption failures
matrix_client.add_event_callback(on_decryption_failure, (MegolmEvent,))
```

### 4. Automatic Key Requesting on Decryption Failure

When the `on_decryption_failure` callback is triggered, it is not enough to simply log the error. The client must actively request the missing decryption key from other clients in the room.

The implementation now monkey-patches the `event.room_id` (which was found to be unreliable) and then uses the standard `event.as_key_request()` method to create and send the `m.room_key_request`.

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# In on_decryption_failure(room, event)
try:
    # Monkey-patch the event object with the correct room_id from the room object
    event.room_id = room.room_id

    request = event.as_key_request(
        matrix_client.user_id, matrix_client.device_id
    )
    await matrix_client.to_device(request)
    logger.info(f"Requested keys for failed decryption of event {event.event_id}")
except Exception as e:
    logger.error(f"Failed to request keys for event {event.event_id}: {e}")
```

### 5. Outgoing Message Formatting (`formatted_body` fix)

A validation error in `matrix-nio`'s event parser was triggered when the relay sent a plain-text message and later received it back from the server. The parser would incorrectly create a `formatted_body: None` field, which failed schema validation.

To work around this, all outgoing `m.room.message` events of `msgtype: "m.text"` sent by `matrix_relay` now **always** include a `format` and `formatted_body` key. For plain-text messages, the `body` and `formatted_body` are identical.

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# In matrix_relay()
content = {
    "msgtype": "m.text",
    "body": plain_body,
    # ... other keys
}

# Always add format and formatted_body to avoid nio validation errors
content["format"] = "org.matrix.custom.html"
content["formatted_body"] = formatted_body
```

### 6. Internal Same-Account Device Verification Workaround

`matrix-nio` does not currently handle the full `m.key.verification.request` flow automatically for this use case. To prevent the "Encrypted by a device not verified by its owner" shield for MMRelay's own account, MMRelay now registers a dedicated to-device callback that drives the SAS flow internally:

1. Receive `m.key.verification.request` from the same Matrix account.
2. Send `m.key.verification.ready`.
3. Accept `m.key.verification.start`.
4. Confirm the SAS when `m.key.verification.key` arrives.
5. Send `m.key.verification.done` after a verified MAC.

This is intentionally scoped to same-account events only (`event.sender == client.user_id`) to avoid auto-verifying external users/devices.

MMRelay also proactively attempts to start self-verification with other unverified devices of the same account at startup (after initial sync), and uses a `whoami` sanity check to confirm current session identity before initiating.

Configuration:

- `matrix.e2ee.self_verify` (preferred)
- `matrix.encryption.self_verify` (legacy alias)
- Default: `true` when E2EE is enabled

**Implementation (`src/mmrelay/matrix_utils.py`):**

```python
# connect_matrix()
await _perform_matrix_login(client, auth_info)
self_verification_enabled = _is_internal_self_verification_enabled(
    matrix_section, e2ee_enabled
)
_register_internal_self_verification_callback(client, self_verification_enabled)

# to-device handler (simplified):
if event_type == "m.key.verification.request":
    await client.to_device(m_key_verification_ready)
elif event_type == "m.key.verification.start":
    await client.accept_key_verification(tx_id)
elif event_type == "m.key.verification.key":
    await client.confirm_short_auth_string(tx_id)
elif event_type == "m.key.verification.mac" and sas.verified:
    await client.to_device(m_key_verification_done)
```

## Summary of E2EE Flow

1.  **Startup**: The client is initialized with the E2EE store path. It authenticates using `restore_login()`, which implicitly loads the store. Keys are uploaded if needed.
2.  **Verification Hook**: When E2EE is enabled, a to-device callback is registered to handle same-account key verification events (`request/ready/start/key/mac/done`).
3.  **Sync**: The client performs a `sync(full_state=True)`, learning which rooms are encrypted.
4.  **Outgoing Message**: `matrix_relay` sends a message from Meshtastic to Matrix. It is correctly encrypted by `nio` because the room's encrypted state is known. The message content includes a `formatted_body` to prevent parser errors.
5.  **Incoming Encrypted Message**: A `MegolmEvent` is received.
    - **If decryption succeeds**: `nio` automatically generates a `RoomMessageText` event. `on_room_message` is triggered, and the decrypted message is relayed to Meshtastic.
    - **If decryption fails**: `nio` fires the `MegolmEvent` callback. `on_decryption_failure` is triggered. The bot logs the error and sends out an `m.room_key_request`.
6.  **Key Arrival**: The key request is received by other clients, who send the key back in a `m.forwarded_room_key` to-device event. `nio` automatically processes this key and stores it.
7.  **Decryption Retry**: The next time the client syncs, it can now decrypt the original message it failed on. The `RoomMessageText` callback will be fired, and the message will be processed.
