docs/DOCKER.md, before:

# Docker Deployment

MMRelay supports Docker deployment with two image options and multiple deployment methods.

## Table of Contents

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Quick Start (Recommended)](#quick-start-recommended)
- [Deployment Methods](#deployment-methods)
  - [Prebuilt Images with Make](#prebuilt-images-with-make)
  - [Portainer/GUI Tools](#portainergui-tools)
  - [Build from Source with Make](#build-from-source-with-make)
  - [Build from Source without Make](#build-from-source-without-make)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Matrix Authentication](#matrix-authentication)
- [Make Commands Reference](#make-commands-reference)
- [Connection Types](#connection-types)
- [Data Persistence](#data-persistence)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Complete Docker Example](#complete-docker-example)
- [Updates](#updates)
- [Advanced Configuration](#advanced-configuration)

## Prerequisites

You need Docker installed on your system. Follow the [official Docker installation guide](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/).

## Quick Start (Recommended)

**Most users should start here** - prebuilt images without cloning the repository:

```bash
# Create directories and download config
mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs
curl -Lo ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml

# Adjust permissions and edit the file
chmod 600 ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml
nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml

# Set up environment and get docker-compose file
grep -q '^MMRELAY_HOME=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo 'MMRELAY_HOME=$HOME' >> .env
grep -q '^UID=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo "UID=$(id -u)" >> .env
grep -q '^GID=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo "GID=$(id -g)" >> .env
curl -o docker-compose.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml

# Optional: Enable automatic updates before first startup
nano docker-compose.yaml  # Uncomment the watchtower section

# Start containers and view logs
docker compose up -d
docker compose logs -f
```

**That's it!** Your MMRelay is now running with the official prebuilt image.

## Deployment Methods

If the Quick Start above doesn't work for your setup, choose from these alternatives:

### Prebuilt Images with Make

If you've cloned the repository locally, use the convenient Make commands:

```bash
make setup-prebuilt  # Copy config, .env, and docker-compose.yaml, then opens editor
make run             # Start container (pulls official image)
make logs            # View logs
```

### Portainer/GUI Tools

For users who prefer web-based Docker management:

1. **Create config file on your host:**

   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs
   curl -o ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml
   nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml
   ```

2. **In Portainer, create a new Stack with this compose:**
   - Copy content from: [sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml](https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/blob/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml)
   - **Important:** Replace `${MMRELAY_HOME}` with your actual home directory path (e.g., `/home/username`)
   - Set environment variables in Portainer if needed (UID, GID, etc.)

3. **Minimal Portainer compose (if you prefer to start simple):**
   ```yaml
   services:
     mmrelay:
       image: ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:latest
       container_name: meshtastic-matrix-relay
       restart: unless-stopped
       user: "1000:1000" # May need to match your user's UID/GID. See the Troubleshooting section.
       environment:
         - TZ=UTC
         - PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1
         - MPLCONFIGDIR=/tmp/matplotlib
       volumes:
         - /home/yourusername/.mmrelay/config.yaml:/app/config.yaml:ro,Z
         - /home/yourusername/.mmrelay:/app/data:Z # credentials.json, E2EE store, logs, DB
   ```
   Replace `/home/yourusername` with your actual home directory.

### Build from Source with Make

For developers who want to build their own image:

```bash
make setup    # Copy config, .env, and docker-compose.yaml, then opens editor
make build    # Build Docker image from source (uses layer caching)
make run      # Start container
make logs     # View logs
```

### Build from Source without Make

If you prefer not to use Make commands:

```bash
# After cloning the repository:
mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs
cp src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml
nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml  # Edit your settings
cp src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml docker-compose.yaml

# Build and start:
docker compose build
docker compose up -d
docker compose logs -f
```

**Note:** The `make config` command is still the easiest way to set up the files correctly. Building from source without any Make commands would require manually creating all configuration files and is not recommended.

## Configuration

MMRelay uses a single configuration file: `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`. All settings are configured in this file, which is mounted into the Docker container.

**Benefits:**

- All settings in one place
- Easy to track changes and version control
- Simple to back up and restore
- No complex environment variable management

**Setup:**

1. Download the sample config: `curl -Lo ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml`
2. Edit the file: `nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`
3. Configure your Matrix rooms, Meshtastic connection, and other settings

## Matrix Authentication

MMRelay requires Matrix authentication. Use the auth system for secure authentication with E2EE support.

### Auth System (`mmrelay auth login`)

Run this on your host system (not in Docker):

```bash
mmrelay auth login
```

This creates `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json` with:

- E2EE support for encrypted rooms
- Persistent device identity (no "new device" notifications)
- Automatic token refresh and key management
- Matrix 2.0 / MAS (Authentication Service) compatibility

The `credentials.json` file is automatically mounted to `/app/data/credentials.json` in the container.

### Authentication Precedence

MMRelay checks for authentication in this order:

1. **`credentials.json`** (from `mmrelay auth login`) - recommended
2. **`config.yaml` matrix section (password)** - fallback; password in config file automatically creates credentials.json

> **Note**: For security and full functionality, use `mmrelay auth login`. The password-based method in `config.yaml` is available as a fallback option.

## Make Commands Reference

### Setup Commands

- `make setup-prebuilt` - Copy config for prebuilt images and open editor (recommended)
- `make setup` - Copy config for building from source and open editor
- `make config` - Copy sample files and create directories (config.yaml, .env, docker-compose.yaml)
- `make edit` - Edit config file with your preferred editor

### Container Management

- `make run` - Start container (prebuilt images or built from source)
- `make stop` - Stop container (keeps container for restart)
- `make logs` - Show container logs
- `make shell` - Access container shell
- `make clean` - Remove containers and networks

### Build Commands (Source Only)

- `make build` - Build Docker image from source (uses layer caching for faster builds)
- `make build-nocache` - Build Docker image from source with --no-cache for fresh builds
- `make rebuild` - Stop, rebuild with --no-cache, and restart container (for updates)

### Manual Docker Commands

If not using make commands:

```bash
# Start with prebuilt image
docker compose up -d

# Build and start from source
docker compose build
docker compose up -d

# View logs
docker compose logs -f

# Stop containers
docker compose down

# Access shell
docker compose exec mmrelay bash
```

## Connection Types

Configure your Meshtastic connection in `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`:

**TCP Connection (recommended):**

```yaml
meshtastic:
  connection_type: tcp
  host: 192.168.1.100 # Your Meshtastic device IP
  port: 4403 # Default Meshtastic TCP port
# Note: MMRelay initiates an outbound TCP connection to the device;
# you do not need a `ports:` mapping in docker-compose.
```

**Serial Connection:**

```yaml
meshtastic:
  connection_type: serial
  serial_port: /dev/ttyUSB0 # Your serial device path
```

For serial connections, add device mapping to docker-compose.yaml:

```yaml
services:
  mmrelay:
    devices:
      - /dev/ttyUSB0:/dev/ttyUSB0
```

**BLE Connection:**

```yaml
meshtastic:
  connection_type: ble
  ble_address: "AA:BB:CC:DD:EE:FF" # Your device's MAC address
```

For BLE connections, add to docker-compose.yaml:

**Recommended approach (secure and functional):**

```yaml
services:
  mmrelay:
    network_mode: host # Required for BLE (Linux only)
    security_opt:
      - apparmor=unconfined # Required to allow DBus communication for BLE
    volumes:
      - /var/run/dbus:/var/run/dbus:ro # D-Bus for BlueZ
```

**Alternative approach:**

```yaml
# If apparmor=unconfined is not acceptable, use privileged mode
services:
  mmrelay:
    network_mode: host
    privileged: true
    volumes:
      - /var/run/dbus:/var/run/dbus:ro
```

**Important:** BLE in Docker only works on Linux hosts. Not supported on Docker Desktop for macOS/Windows.

## Data Persistence

Uses the same directories as standalone installation:

- **Config**: `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml` (mounted read-only to `/app/config.yaml`)
- **Data Directory**: `~/.mmrelay/` (mounted to `/app/data`). This directory on your host will contain subdirectories for the database (`data/`), logs (`logs/`), and plugins.

**Volume Mounting Explanation:**
The Docker compose files mount `~/.mmrelay/` to `/app/data` for persistent data and separately bind-mount `config.yaml` to `/app/config.yaml` (read-only). This dual-mounting pattern ensures the container can find the config file at its expected canonical path, while keeping all other data in a single directory. On SELinux systems, add `:Z` to volume options to label mounts correctly, e.g., `/app/config.yaml:ro,Z` and `/app/data:Z`.

This means your Docker and standalone installations share the same data!

**Environment Configuration:**
Docker Compose uses the `.env` file to set data directory paths. The `make config` command creates this automatically with:

```bash
MMRELAY_HOME=$HOME
```

**Custom Data Location:**
To use a different location, edit the `.env` file:

```bash
MMRELAY_HOME=/path/to/your/data
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Portainer Issues

**Volume path errors:**

- Ensure paths like `/home/yourusername/.mmrelay/` exist on the host
- Replace `yourusername` with your actual username
- Create directories manually: `mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs`

**Permission errors:**

- Check that the user ID (1000) has access to the mounted directories
- Adjust `UID` and `GID` in environment variables if needed
- Use `chown -R 1000:1000 ~/.mmrelay/` to fix ownership

**Environment variable issues:**

- Portainer doesn't expand `$HOME` - use absolute paths
- Set environment variables in Portainer's stack environment section
- Or replace `${MMRELAY_HOME}` with absolute paths in the compose file

**Config file not found:**

- Verify the config file exists at the mounted path
- Check the volume mapping in the compose file
- Ensure the file is readable by the container user

### General Docker Issues

**Container won't start:**

- Check logs: `docker compose logs mmrelay`
- Verify config syntax (host):
  `mmrelay config check --config ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`
- Verify config syntax (container):
  `docker compose exec mmrelay mmrelay config check --config /app/config.yaml`
- Ensure all required config fields are set

**Connection issues:**

- For TCP: Verify Meshtastic device IP and port 4403
- For Serial: Check device permissions and path
- For BLE: Ensure host networking is enabled and AppArmor is disabled (`apparmor=unconfined`). Use privileged mode as an alternative if apparmor unconfined is not acceptable.

### BLE-Specific Troubleshooting

**BLE device not found:**

```bash
# Check if Bluetooth is available on host
sudo systemctl status bluetooth
bluetoothctl list

# Verify container can access Bluetooth
docker compose exec mmrelay bluetoothctl list
```

**Permission denied errors:**

- Try the alternative configurations above (capabilities or privileged mode)
- Check D-Bus socket: `docker compose exec mmrelay ls -la /var/run/dbus`
- On SELinux systems, add `:Z` to volume mounts

**D-Bus connection failures:**

```bash
# Test D-Bus connectivity
docker compose exec mmrelay dbus-send --system --dest=org.bluez --print-reply / org.freedesktop.DBus.Introspectable.Introspect
```

**Adapter blocked:**

```bash
# Check and unblock if needed
sudo rfkill unblock bluetooth
```

## Complete Docker Example

Here's a complete example showing the recommended setup:

### Step 1: Set up authentication

```bash
mmrelay auth login
```

### Step 2: Create and configure config.yaml

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs
curl -o ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml
nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml  # Configure your settings
```

### Step 3: Create docker-compose.yaml

```yaml
services:
  mmrelay:
    image: ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:latest
    container_name: meshtastic-matrix-relay
    restart: unless-stopped
    user: "${UID:-1000}:${GID:-1000}"
    volumes:
      # For SELinux systems (RHEL/CentOS/Fedora), add :Z flag to prevent permission denied errors
      - ${MMRELAY_HOME:-$HOME}/.mmrelay/config.yaml:/app/config.yaml:ro,Z
      - ${MMRELAY_HOME:-$HOME}/.mmrelay:/app/data:Z
      # For non-SELinux systems, you can use:
      # - ${MMRELAY_HOME:-$HOME}/.mmrelay/config.yaml:/app/config.yaml:ro
      # - ${MMRELAY_HOME:-$HOME}/.mmrelay:/app/data
```

### Step 4: Start the container

```bash
# The following commands set up your environment to prevent permission issues
grep -q '^MMRELAY_HOME=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo 'MMRELAY_HOME=$HOME' >> .env
grep -q '^UID=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo "UID=$(id -u)" >> .env
grep -q '^GID=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo "GID=$(id -g)" >> .env
docker compose up -d
docker compose logs -f
```

**This provides:**

- E2EE support for encrypted Matrix rooms
- Persistent device identity (no "new device" notifications)
- All configuration in one file (`config.yaml`)
- Simple, minimal setup

### Step 5: Verify E2EE Status (Optional)

If you have enabled E2EE, you can verify its status by checking the logs:

```bash
docker compose logs mmrelay | grep -i e2ee
```

Look for messages like:

- "End-to-End Encryption (E2EE) is enabled"
- "Using credentials from ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json"
- "Found X encrypted rooms out of Y total rooms"

## Updates

**Prebuilt images:**

- **Automatic updates (Recommended):** Uncomment the Watchtower service in your docker-compose.yaml file to get daily updates at 2 AM
- **Manual updates:** `docker compose pull && docker compose up -d`

**Watchtower Benefits:**

- Automatic security updates
- No manual intervention required
- Cleans up old images to save space
- Only updates MMRelay container (safe for other services)
- Uses maintained fork (nickfedor/watchtower) that fixes Docker API compatibility issues

**Built from source:**

```bash
git pull
make rebuild    # Stop, rebuild with fresh code, and restart
```

## Advanced Configuration

For additional configuration options like message formatting, debug logging, and environment variable overrides, see [Advanced Configuration](ADVANCED_CONFIGURATION.md).

Commit message:

Replace process-based health check with file-existence check (#428)
* feat(docker): implement ready file based health check

Replace pgrep-based health check with file existence check to
verify application readiness. Adds MMRELAY_READY_FILE environment
variable to configure the readiness indicator path.

* refactor(docker): use environment variable for health check path

* docs: add docker health check documentation

Document the ready file based health check mechanism including
configuration options and benefits for container orchestration.

Also correct version references in Kubernetes docs from 1.2.10 to 1.2.9.

* fix(docker): optional ready-file check with process fallback

Remove the default MMRELAY_READY_FILE environment variable so the
ready-file health check becomes opt-in rather than mandatory. Update
the HEALTHCHECK command to conditionally verify the ready file when
the variable is set, falling back to process detection (pgrep) when
unset.

This ensures backward compatibility for existing deployments while
allowing users to explicitly enable the more reliable ready-file
health check by setting MMRELAY_READY_FILE to a writable path.
Documentation updated to reflect the new default behavior and
configuration requirements.

* fix(docker): simplify health check command and update docs

Remove unnecessary `/bin/sh -c` wrapper from Dockerfile HEALTHCHECK
command. Update documentation to provide explicit docker-compose
configuration instructions instead of referencing commented examples.

docs/DOCKER.md, after:

# Docker Deployment

MMRelay supports Docker deployment with two image options and multiple deployment methods.

## Table of Contents

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Quick Start (Recommended)](#quick-start-recommended)
- [Deployment Methods](#deployment-methods)
  - [Prebuilt Images with Make](#prebuilt-images-with-make)
  - [Portainer/GUI Tools](#portainergui-tools)
  - [Build from Source with Make](#build-from-source-with-make)
  - [Build from Source without Make](#build-from-source-without-make)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Matrix Authentication](#matrix-authentication)
- [Make Commands Reference](#make-commands-reference)
- [Connection Types](#connection-types)
- [Data Persistence](#data-persistence)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Complete Docker Example](#complete-docker-example)
- [Updates](#updates)
- [Advanced Configuration](#advanced-configuration)

## Prerequisites

You need Docker installed on your system. Follow the [official Docker installation guide](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/).

## Quick Start (Recommended)

**Most users should start here** - prebuilt images without cloning the repository:

```bash
# Create directories and download config
mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs
curl -Lo ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml

# Adjust permissions and edit the file
chmod 600 ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml
nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml

# Set up environment and get docker-compose file
grep -q '^MMRELAY_HOME=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo 'MMRELAY_HOME=$HOME' >> .env
grep -q '^UID=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo "UID=$(id -u)" >> .env
grep -q '^GID=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo "GID=$(id -g)" >> .env
curl -o docker-compose.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml

# Optional: Enable automatic updates before first startup
nano docker-compose.yaml  # Uncomment the watchtower section

# Start containers and view logs
docker compose up -d
docker compose logs -f
```

**That's it!** Your MMRelay is now running with the official prebuilt image.

## Deployment Methods

If the Quick Start above doesn't work for your setup, choose from these alternatives:

### Prebuilt Images with Make

If you've cloned the repository locally, use the convenient Make commands:

```bash
make setup-prebuilt  # Copy config, .env, and docker-compose.yaml, then opens editor
make run             # Start container (pulls official image)
make logs            # View logs
```

### Portainer/GUI Tools

For users who prefer web-based Docker management:

1. **Create config file on your host:**

   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs
   curl -o ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml
   nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml
   ```

2. **In Portainer, create a new Stack with this compose:**
   - Copy content from: [sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml](https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/blob/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml)
   - **Important:** Replace `${MMRELAY_HOME}` with your actual home directory path (e.g., `/home/username`)
   - Set environment variables in Portainer if needed (UID, GID, etc.)

3. **Minimal Portainer compose (if you prefer to start simple):**
   ```yaml
   services:
     mmrelay:
       image: ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:latest
       container_name: meshtastic-matrix-relay
       restart: unless-stopped
       user: "1000:1000" # May need to match your user's UID/GID. See the Troubleshooting section.
       environment:
         - TZ=UTC
         - PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1
         - MPLCONFIGDIR=/tmp/matplotlib
       volumes:
         - /home/yourusername/.mmrelay/config.yaml:/app/config.yaml:ro,Z
         - /home/yourusername/.mmrelay:/app/data:Z # credentials.json, E2EE store, logs, DB
   ```
   Replace `/home/yourusername` with your actual home directory.

### Build from Source with Make

For developers who want to build their own image:

```bash
make setup    # Copy config, .env, and docker-compose.yaml, then opens editor
make build    # Build Docker image from source (uses layer caching)
make run      # Start container
make logs     # View logs
```

### Build from Source without Make

If you prefer not to use Make commands:

```bash
# After cloning the repository:
mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs
cp src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml
nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml  # Edit your settings
cp src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml docker-compose.yaml

# Build and start:
docker compose build
docker compose up -d
docker compose logs -f
```

**Note:** The `make config` command is still the easiest way to set up the files correctly. Building from source without any Make commands would require manually creating all configuration files and is not recommended.

## Configuration

MMRelay uses a single configuration file: `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`. All settings are configured in this file, which is mounted into the Docker container.

**Benefits:**

- All settings in one place
- Easy to track changes and version control
- Simple to back up and restore
- No complex environment variable management

**Setup:**

1. Download the sample config: `curl -Lo ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml`
2. Edit the file: `nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`
3. Configure your Matrix rooms, Meshtastic connection, and other settings

## Matrix Authentication

MMRelay requires Matrix authentication. Use the auth system for secure authentication with E2EE support.

### Auth System (`mmrelay auth login`)

Run this on your host system (not in Docker):

```bash
mmrelay auth login
```

This creates `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json` with:

- E2EE support for encrypted rooms
- Persistent device identity (no "new device" notifications)
- Automatic token refresh and key management
- Matrix 2.0 / MAS (Authentication Service) compatibility

The `credentials.json` file is automatically mounted to `/app/data/credentials.json` in the container.

### Authentication Precedence

MMRelay checks for authentication in this order:

1. **`credentials.json`** (from `mmrelay auth login`) - recommended
2. **`config.yaml` matrix section (password)** - fallback; password in config file automatically creates credentials.json

> **Note**: For security and full functionality, use `mmrelay auth login`. The password-based method in `config.yaml` is available as a fallback option.

## Make Commands Reference

### Setup Commands

- `make setup-prebuilt` - Copy config for prebuilt images and open editor (recommended)
- `make setup` - Copy config for building from source and open editor
- `make config` - Copy sample files and create directories (config.yaml, .env, docker-compose.yaml)
- `make edit` - Edit config file with your preferred editor

### Container Management

- `make run` - Start container (prebuilt images or built from source)
- `make stop` - Stop container (keeps container for restart)
- `make logs` - Show container logs
- `make shell` - Access container shell
- `make clean` - Remove containers and networks

### Build Commands (Source Only)

- `make build` - Build Docker image from source (uses layer caching for faster builds)
- `make build-nocache` - Build Docker image from source with --no-cache for fresh builds
- `make rebuild` - Stop, rebuild with --no-cache, and restart container (for updates)

### Manual Docker Commands

If not using make commands:

```bash
# Start with prebuilt image
docker compose up -d

# Build and start from source
docker compose build
docker compose up -d

# View logs
docker compose logs -f

# Stop containers
docker compose down

# Access shell
docker compose exec mmrelay bash
```

## Connection Types

Configure your Meshtastic connection in `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`:

**TCP Connection (recommended):**

```yaml
meshtastic:
  connection_type: tcp
  host: 192.168.1.100 # Your Meshtastic device IP
  port: 4403 # Default Meshtastic TCP port
# Note: MMRelay initiates an outbound TCP connection to the device;
# you do not need a `ports:` mapping in docker-compose.
```

**Serial Connection:**

```yaml
meshtastic:
  connection_type: serial
  serial_port: /dev/ttyUSB0 # Your serial device path
```

For serial connections, add device mapping to docker-compose.yaml:

```yaml
services:
  mmrelay:
    devices:
      - /dev/ttyUSB0:/dev/ttyUSB0
```

**BLE Connection:**

```yaml
meshtastic:
  connection_type: ble
  ble_address: "AA:BB:CC:DD:EE:FF" # Your device's MAC address
```

For BLE connections, add to docker-compose.yaml:

**Recommended approach (secure and functional):**

```yaml
services:
  mmrelay:
    network_mode: host # Required for BLE (Linux only)
    security_opt:
      - apparmor=unconfined # Required to allow DBus communication for BLE
    volumes:
      - /var/run/dbus:/var/run/dbus:ro # D-Bus for BlueZ
```

**Alternative approach:**

```yaml
# If apparmor=unconfined is not acceptable, use privileged mode
services:
  mmrelay:
    network_mode: host
    privileged: true
    volumes:
      - /var/run/dbus:/var/run/dbus:ro
```

**Important:** BLE in Docker only works on Linux hosts. Not supported on Docker Desktop for macOS/Windows.

## Data Persistence

Uses the same directories as standalone installation:

- **Config**: `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml` (mounted read-only to `/app/config.yaml`)
- **Data Directory**: `~/.mmrelay/` (mounted to `/app/data`). This directory on your host will contain subdirectories for the database (`data/`), logs (`logs/`), and plugins.

**Volume Mounting Explanation:**
The Docker compose files mount `~/.mmrelay/` to `/app/data` for persistent data and separately bind-mount `config.yaml` to `/app/config.yaml` (read-only). This dual-mounting pattern ensures the container can find the config file at its expected canonical path, while keeping all other data in a single directory. On SELinux systems, add `:Z` to volume options to label mounts correctly, e.g., `/app/config.yaml:ro,Z` and `/app/data:Z`.

This means your Docker and standalone installations share the same data!

**Environment Configuration:**
Docker Compose uses the `.env` file to set data directory paths. The `make config` command creates this automatically with:

```bash
MMRELAY_HOME=$HOME
```

**Custom Data Location:**
To use a different location, edit the `.env` file:

```bash
MMRELAY_HOME=/path/to/your/data
```

## Health Checks

The Docker image includes a built-in health check. By default it uses process detection (legacy behavior). You can opt in to the more reliable ready-file check by setting `MMRELAY_READY_FILE` to a writable path.

**How it works (when ready-file mode is enabled):**

- When MMRelay starts successfully, it creates a ready file at the path you set (example: `/tmp/mmrelay/ready`)
- The health check (`test -f "$MMRELAY_READY_FILE"`) verifies this file exists
- The file is periodically updated (every 60 seconds by default) to show the application is still responsive
- If the application crashes or fails to start, the ready file is not created/removed, and the container is marked as unhealthy

**Benefits:**

- Tools like Watchtower wait for the health check to pass before considering an update successful
- Docker compose shows health status in `docker compose ps`
- Monitoring tools can detect when the app is truly ready vs. just running

**Configuration (optional):**

- Enable ready-file mode by setting `MMRELAY_READY_FILE` (example: `/tmp/mmrelay/ready`)
- Ensure the path is writable; for read-only root filesystems, use a mounted path like `/app/data/mmrelay/ready`
- To customize the heartbeat interval, set `MMRELAY_READY_HEARTBEAT_SECONDS` (default: 60)
- To enable this in Compose, add `MMRELAY_READY_FILE` to the `environment` section (e.g., `- MMRELAY_READY_FILE=/tmp/mmrelay/ready`)

## Troubleshooting

### Common Portainer Issues

**Volume path errors:**

- Ensure paths like `/home/yourusername/.mmrelay/` exist on the host
- Replace `yourusername` with your actual username
- Create directories manually: `mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs`

**Permission errors:**

- Check that the user ID (1000) has access to the mounted directories
- Adjust `UID` and `GID` in environment variables if needed
- Use `chown -R 1000:1000 ~/.mmrelay/` to fix ownership

**Environment variable issues:**

- Portainer doesn't expand `$HOME` - use absolute paths
- Set environment variables in Portainer's stack environment section
- Or replace `${MMRELAY_HOME}` with absolute paths in the compose file

**Config file not found:**

- Verify the config file exists at the mounted path
- Check the volume mapping in the compose file
- Ensure the file is readable by the container user

### General Docker Issues

**Container won't start:**

- Check logs: `docker compose logs mmrelay`
- Verify config syntax (host):
  `mmrelay config check --config ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`
- Verify config syntax (container):
  `docker compose exec mmrelay mmrelay config check --config /app/config.yaml`
- Ensure all required config fields are set

**Connection issues:**

- For TCP: Verify Meshtastic device IP and port 4403
- For Serial: Check device permissions and path
- For BLE: Ensure host networking is enabled and AppArmor is disabled (`apparmor=unconfined`). Use privileged mode as an alternative if apparmor unconfined is not acceptable.

### BLE-Specific Troubleshooting

**BLE device not found:**

```bash
# Check if Bluetooth is available on host
sudo systemctl status bluetooth
bluetoothctl list

# Verify container can access Bluetooth
docker compose exec mmrelay bluetoothctl list
```

**Permission denied errors:**

- Try the alternative configurations above (capabilities or privileged mode)
- Check D-Bus socket: `docker compose exec mmrelay ls -la /var/run/dbus`
- On SELinux systems, add `:Z` to volume mounts

**D-Bus connection failures:**

```bash
# Test D-Bus connectivity
docker compose exec mmrelay dbus-send --system --dest=org.bluez --print-reply / org.freedesktop.DBus.Introspectable.Introspect
```

**Adapter blocked:**

```bash
# Check and unblock if needed
sudo rfkill unblock bluetooth
```

## Complete Docker Example

Here's a complete example showing the recommended setup:

### Step 1: Set up authentication

```bash
mmrelay auth login
```

### Step 2: Create and configure config.yaml

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.mmrelay/data ~/.mmrelay/logs
curl -o ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml
nano ~/.mmrelay/config.yaml  # Configure your settings
```

### Step 3: Create docker-compose.yaml

```yaml
services:
  mmrelay:
    image: ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:latest
    container_name: meshtastic-matrix-relay
    restart: unless-stopped
    user: "${UID:-1000}:${GID:-1000}"
    volumes:
      # For SELinux systems (RHEL/CentOS/Fedora), add :Z flag to prevent permission denied errors
      - ${MMRELAY_HOME:-$HOME}/.mmrelay/config.yaml:/app/config.yaml:ro,Z
      - ${MMRELAY_HOME:-$HOME}/.mmrelay:/app/data:Z
      # For non-SELinux systems, you can use:
      # - ${MMRELAY_HOME:-$HOME}/.mmrelay/config.yaml:/app/config.yaml:ro
      # - ${MMRELAY_HOME:-$HOME}/.mmrelay:/app/data
```

### Step 4: Start the container

```bash
# The following commands set up your environment to prevent permission issues
grep -q '^MMRELAY_HOME=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo 'MMRELAY_HOME=$HOME' >> .env
grep -q '^UID=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo "UID=$(id -u)" >> .env
grep -q '^GID=' .env 2>/dev/null || echo "GID=$(id -g)" >> .env
docker compose up -d
docker compose logs -f
```

**This provides:**

- E2EE support for encrypted Matrix rooms
- Persistent device identity (no "new device" notifications)
- All configuration in one file (`config.yaml`)
- Simple, minimal setup

### Step 5: Verify E2EE Status (Optional)

If you have enabled E2EE, you can verify its status by checking the logs:

```bash
docker compose logs mmrelay | grep -i e2ee
```

Look for messages like:

- "End-to-End Encryption (E2EE) is enabled"
- "Using credentials from ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json"
- "Found X encrypted rooms out of Y total rooms"

## Updates

**Prebuilt images:**

- **Automatic updates (Recommended):** Uncomment the Watchtower service in your docker-compose.yaml file to get daily updates at 2 AM
- **Manual updates:** `docker compose pull && docker compose up -d`

**Watchtower Benefits:**

- Automatic security updates
- No manual intervention required
- Cleans up old images to save space
- Only updates MMRelay container (safe for other services)
- Uses maintained fork (nickfedor/watchtower) that fixes Docker API compatibility issues

**Built from source:**

```bash
git pull
make rebuild    # Stop, rebuild with fresh code, and restart
```

## Advanced Configuration

For additional configuration options like message formatting, debug logging, and environment variable overrides, see [Advanced Configuration](ADVANCED_CONFIGURATION.md).
