docs/E2EE.md, before:

# Matrix End-to-End Encryption (E2EE) Guide

MMRelay includes full support for **Matrix End-to-End Encryption**, enabling secure communication in encrypted Matrix rooms. This guide covers everything you need to set up and use E2EE features.

## E2EE in MMRelay

MMRelay can participate in encrypted Matrix rooms, allowing your Meshtastic network to communicate securely through Matrix's end-to-end encryption. When E2EE is enabled:

- Messages from Meshtastic are encrypted before being sent to encrypted Matrix rooms
- Encrypted messages from Matrix are decrypted before being relayed to Meshtastic
- MMRelay maintains its own device identity and encryption keys
- Both encrypted and regular rooms work seamlessly in the same relay

## Quick Start

### 1. Install E2EE Support

```bash
# Install MMRelay with E2EE support (recommended)
pipx install 'mmrelay[e2e]'

# Or using pip
pip install 'mmrelay[e2e]'
```

### 2. Enable E2EE in Configuration

Add E2EE configuration to your `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`:

```yaml
matrix:
  homeserver: https://your-matrix-server.org

  # E2EE Configuration
  e2ee:
    enabled: true
    # Optional: Custom store path (default: ~/.mmrelay/store)
    # store_path: ~/.mmrelay/store
```

### 3. Set Up Authentication

Use the built-in authentication command to create your bot's E2EE-enabled credentials:

```bash
mmrelay auth login
```

This interactive command will:

- Prompt for your Matrix homeserver, username, and password
- Create secure credentials with E2EE support
- Save authentication details to `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`
- Set up encryption keys for secure communication

### 4. Start MMRelay

```bash
mmrelay
```

That's it! MMRelay will automatically encrypt messages for encrypted rooms and decrypt incoming encrypted messages. The first time it sees an encrypted message from a new device, it may log a "Failed to decrypt" error, but it will automatically request the necessary keys and decrypt the message on the next sync.

## Requirements

- **Python 3.9 or higher**
- **Linux or macOS** (E2EE is not supported on Windows due to library limitations)
- **MMRelay v1.2+** with E2EE support: `pipx install 'mmrelay[e2e]'`

### Windows Limitation

**E2EE is not available on Windows** due to technical limitations with the required cryptographic libraries. The `python-olm` library requires native C libraries that are difficult to compile and install on Windows systems.

**Windows users can still use MMRelay** for regular (unencrypted) Matrix communication. Use `mmrelay auth login` to create credentials on Windows (recommended, E2EE not available). Manual access token configuration is also possible but not recommended due to Matrix Authentication Service (MAS) compatibility issues.

## The `auth login` Command

The `auth login` command is the recommended way to set up Matrix authentication for MMRelay v1.2+. It provides secure credential management with full E2EE support.

### What It Does

```bash
mmrelay auth login
```

**The authentication process:**

1. **Interactive Setup**: Prompts for Matrix homeserver, username, and password
2. **Secure Login**: Creates a new Matrix session with encryption enabled
3. **Device Registration**: Generates a unique, persistent device ID for MMRelay
4. **Credential Storage**: Saves authentication details to `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`
5. **Key Setup**: Initializes encryption key storage in `~/.mmrelay/store/`

### Example Session

```bash
$ mmrelay auth login
Matrix Bot Login for E2EE
=========================
Matrix homeserver (e.g., https://matrix.org): https://matrix.example.org
Matrix username (e.g., @user:matrix.org): @mmrelay-bot:matrix.example.org
Matrix password: [password hidden]

✅ Login successful!
✅ Device ID: MMRELAY_ABC123DEF
✅ Credentials saved to ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json
✅ E2EE store initialized at ~/.mmrelay/store/

You can now start MMRelay with: mmrelay
```

### Logging Out

To completely log out and clear all Matrix session data:

```bash
mmrelay auth logout
```

This command will:

- Verify your Matrix password for security
- Log out from the Matrix server (invalidating access tokens)
- Remove `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`
- Clear the E2EE store directory (`~/.mmrelay/store/`)
- Provide confirmation of all cleanup actions

After logout, you'll need to run `mmrelay auth login` again to re-authenticate.

### Files Created

**`~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`** - Contains your Matrix session:

```json
{
  "homeserver": "https://matrix.example.org",
  "user_id": "@mmrelay-bot:matrix.example.org",
  "access_token": "your_access_token_here",
  "device_id": "MMRELAY_ABC123DEF"
}
```

**`~/.mmrelay/store/`** - Directory containing encryption keys and device information (multiple database files).

## How It Works

### Automatic Encryption Detection

MMRelay automatically detects room encryption status:

- **Encrypted rooms**: Messages are automatically encrypted before sending
- **Unencrypted rooms**: Messages are sent as normal plaintext
- **Mixed environments**: Each room is handled according to its encryption status

### Device Management

MMRelay manages encryption devices automatically:

- **Consistent Device ID**: Maintains the same device identity across restarts
- **Key Storage**: Encryption keys are stored securely in `~/.mmrelay/store/`
- **Automatic Key Sharing**: When the bot sees an encrypted message it can't read, it automatically requests the necessary keys from other clients in the room.
- **Device Trust**: Uses `ignore_unverified_devices=True` for reliable operation
- **Key Upload**: Automatically uploads encryption keys when needed

### Message Flow

1. **Outgoing Messages** (Meshtastic → Matrix):
   - MMRelay receives message from Meshtastic device
   - Checks if target Matrix room is encrypted
   - If encrypted: Encrypts message using room's encryption keys
   - Sends encrypted message to Matrix room

2. **Incoming Messages** (Matrix → Meshtastic):
   - MMRelay receives an encrypted message from a Matrix room.
   - If it cannot be decrypted, the bot automatically requests the key.
   - On a subsequent sync, the bot receives the key and decrypts the message.
   - Forwards decrypted message to Meshtastic device.

## File Locations

### Configuration Files

- **Main Config**: `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`
- **E2EE Credentials**: `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`
- **Encryption Store**: `~/.mmrelay/store/` (directory)

### Credentials File Format

The `credentials.json` file contains:

```json
{
  "homeserver": "https://your-matrix-server.org",
  "user_id": "@your-bot:your-matrix-server.org",
  "access_token": "your_access_token_here",
  "device_id": "MMRELAY_DEVICE_ID"
}
```

**Important**: Keep this file secure as it contains your Matrix access credentials.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### "E2EE features not available on Windows"

**Problem**: E2EE features don't work on Windows even with `mmrelay auth login`.

**Explanation**: E2EE requires the `python-olm` library, which depends on native C libraries that are difficult to compile on Windows.

**Solutions**:

- **Use Linux or macOS** for full E2EE support
- **On Windows**: `mmrelay auth login` still works for regular Matrix communication (recommended)
- **Legacy alternative**: Configure credentials manually in `config.yaml`:
  ```yaml
  matrix:
    homeserver: https://your-matrix-server.org
    access_token: your_access_token
    bot_user_id: @yourbot:your-matrix-server.org
  ```

⚠️ **Important**: Manual access tokens may expire on homeservers using Matrix Authentication Service (MAS), including matrix.org. Use `mmrelay auth login` even on Windows for reliable authentication.

**Note**: Credentials created with `mmrelay auth login` on Windows will work with E2EE if you later use them on Linux/macOS.

#### "No E2EE dependencies found"

**Solution**: Install E2EE dependencies (Linux/macOS only):

```bash
pipx install 'mmrelay[e2e]'
```

#### "Failed to decrypt event" error in logs

**Problem**: You see `ERROR Matrix: Failed to decrypt event...` in your logs.

**Explanation**: This is usually normal, temporary behavior. It happens when another user sends a message in an encrypted room and the relay doesn't have the decryption key for it yet.

**Solution**:

- **Wait**: The relay will automatically request the key in the background. The message should be successfully decrypted within the next minute during the next sync from the server.
- **If the error persists for a long time**: This might indicate a de-synchronized session. The best way to fix this is to regenerate your credentials and key store.

  ```bash
  # Remove old credentials and store
  rm ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json
  rm -rf ~/.mmrelay/store/

  # Create new credentials
  mmrelay auth login
  ```

### Verification and Testing

#### Check E2EE Status

Look for these log messages when MMRelay starts:

```bash
INFO Matrix: Found credentials at ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json
INFO Matrix: Using device ID: YOUR_DEVICE_ID
INFO Matrix: Setting up End-to-End Encryption...
INFO Matrix: Encryption keys uploaded successfully
INFO Matrix: Performing initial sync to initialize rooms...
INFO Matrix: Initial sync completed. Found X rooms.
```

#### Verify Message Encryption

In your Matrix client (Element, etc.):

- **Encrypted messages**: Show with a lock icon or green shield.
- **Unencrypted messages**: Show with a red shield and "Not encrypted" warning.

If messages from MMRelay show as unencrypted in encrypted rooms, check your MMRelay version and configuration.

## Security Considerations

### Device Verification

MMRelay uses `ignore_unverified_devices=True` for automated bot operation:

- Interactive device verification is not practical for automated bots
- This setting allows reliable operation while maintaining encryption

### Key Storage

- Encryption keys are stored in `~/.mmrelay/store/`
- This directory should be backed up to preserve encryption history
- Protect this directory with appropriate file permissions
- Consider encrypting the filesystem where this directory is stored

### Access Control

- The `credentials.json` file contains sensitive authentication data
- Limit access to this file to the user running MMRelay
- Consider using environment variables for additional security

## Backward Compatibility

E2EE support is fully backward compatible:

- **Existing setups**: Continue to work without changes
- **Mixed environments**: Can handle both encrypted and unencrypted rooms
- **Optional feature**: E2EE can be disabled by setting `e2ee.enabled: false`

## Technical Details

### Implementation

- Uses matrix-nio library with Olm/Megolm encryption protocols
- E2EE store loaded before sync operations for proper initialization
- Automatic key management with `ignore_unverified_devices=True`

## Docker E2EE Setup

MMRelay supports E2EE in Docker environments using environment variables for easy configuration.

### Prerequisites

- **Linux/macOS host**: E2EE is not supported on Windows due to library limitations
- **E2EE-enabled image**: Use the official image `ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:latest`

### Quick Docker E2EE Setup

#### Method 1: Auth System + Docker (Recommended)

For complete Docker E2EE setup instructions with environment variables for operational settings, see the [Docker Guide E2EE Setup section](DOCKER.md#method-1-auth-system--environment-variables-recommended-for-e2ee).

#### Method 2: Mount Credentials File

```bash
# On host: Create credentials using auth login
mmrelay auth login

# Then mount the credentials file
```

```yaml
volumes:
  - ${MMRELAY_HOME}/.mmrelay:/app/data # Includes config.yaml, credentials.json, and E2EE store
```

### Configuration

Ensure E2EE is enabled in your `config.yaml`:

```yaml
matrix:
  e2ee:
    enabled: true
```

The E2EE store directory is automatically created in the mounted data volume.

For complete Docker setup instructions, see the [Docker Guide](DOCKER.md#method-1-auth-system--environment-variables-recommended-for-e2ee).

### Performance Impact

E2EE adds minimal overhead:

- **Startup time**: Slightly longer due to key synchronization
- **Message latency**: Negligible encryption/decryption time
- **Memory usage**: Small increase for key storage
- **Network usage**: Additional sync traffic for key management

For questions or issues with E2EE support, please check the [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/issues) or create a new issue with the `e2ee` label.

Commit message:

Modernize Windows installer authentication and remove legacy token references
- Fix CLI syntax in Windows installer batch file creation
- Replace access token fields with password-based authentication
- Update installer UI to use modern OIDC-compatible authentication
- Add setup-auth.bat for easy authentication configuration
- Remove all references to manual access tokens from documentation
- Update sample config to use password instead of access_token
- Modernize DOCKER.md, INSTRUCTIONS.md, and E2EE.md authentication sections
- Windows installer now creates config.yaml with password field for auto-login
- Compatible with Matrix 2.0/MAS authentication service

docs/E2EE.md, after:

# Matrix End-to-End Encryption (E2EE) Guide

MMRelay includes full support for **Matrix End-to-End Encryption**, enabling secure communication in encrypted Matrix rooms. This guide covers everything you need to set up and use E2EE features.

## E2EE in MMRelay

MMRelay can participate in encrypted Matrix rooms, allowing your Meshtastic network to communicate securely through Matrix's end-to-end encryption. When E2EE is enabled:

- Messages from Meshtastic are encrypted before being sent to encrypted Matrix rooms
- Encrypted messages from Matrix are decrypted before being relayed to Meshtastic
- MMRelay maintains its own device identity and encryption keys
- Both encrypted and regular rooms work seamlessly in the same relay

## Quick Start

### 1. Install E2EE Support

```bash
# Install MMRelay with E2EE support (recommended)
pipx install 'mmrelay[e2e]'

# Or using pip
pip install 'mmrelay[e2e]'
```

### 2. Enable E2EE in Configuration

Add E2EE configuration to your `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`:

```yaml
matrix:
  homeserver: https://your-matrix-server.org

  # E2EE Configuration
  e2ee:
    enabled: true
    # Optional: Custom store path (default: ~/.mmrelay/store)
    # store_path: ~/.mmrelay/store
```

### 3. Set Up Authentication

Use the built-in authentication command to create your bot's E2EE-enabled credentials:

```bash
mmrelay auth login
```

This interactive command will:

- Prompt for your Matrix homeserver, username, and password
- Create secure credentials with E2EE support
- Save authentication details to `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`
- Set up encryption keys for secure communication

### 4. Start MMRelay

```bash
mmrelay
```

That's it! MMRelay will automatically encrypt messages for encrypted rooms and decrypt incoming encrypted messages. The first time it sees an encrypted message from a new device, it may log a "Failed to decrypt" error, but it will automatically request the necessary keys and decrypt the message on the next sync.

## Requirements

- **Python 3.9 or higher**
- **Linux or macOS** (E2EE is not supported on Windows due to library limitations)
- **MMRelay v1.2+** with E2EE support: `pipx install 'mmrelay[e2e]'`

### Windows Limitation

**E2EE is not available on Windows** due to technical limitations with the required cryptographic libraries. The `python-olm` library requires native C libraries that are difficult to compile and install on Windows systems.

**Windows users can still use MMRelay** for regular (unencrypted) Matrix communication. Use `mmrelay auth login` to create credentials on Windows (recommended, E2EE not available). Manual access token configuration is also possible but not recommended due to Matrix Authentication Service (MAS) compatibility issues.

## The `auth login` Command

The `auth login` command is the recommended way to set up Matrix authentication for MMRelay v1.2+. It provides secure credential management with full E2EE support.

### What It Does

```bash
mmrelay auth login
```

**The authentication process:**

1. **Interactive Setup**: Prompts for Matrix homeserver, username, and password
2. **Secure Login**: Creates a new Matrix session with encryption enabled
3. **Device Registration**: Generates a unique, persistent device ID for MMRelay
4. **Credential Storage**: Saves authentication details to `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`
5. **Key Setup**: Initializes encryption key storage in `~/.mmrelay/store/`

### Example Session

```bash
$ mmrelay auth login
Matrix Bot Login for E2EE
=========================
Matrix homeserver (e.g., https://matrix.org): https://matrix.example.org
Matrix username (e.g., @user:matrix.org): @mmrelay-bot:matrix.example.org
Matrix password: [password hidden]

✅ Login successful!
✅ Device ID: MMRELAY_ABC123DEF
✅ Credentials saved to ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json
✅ E2EE store initialized at ~/.mmrelay/store/

You can now start MMRelay with: mmrelay
```

### Logging Out

To completely log out and clear all Matrix session data:

```bash
mmrelay auth logout
```

This command will:

- Verify your Matrix password for security
- Log out from the Matrix server (invalidating access tokens)
- Remove `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`
- Clear the E2EE store directory (`~/.mmrelay/store/`)
- Provide confirmation of all cleanup actions

After logout, you'll need to run `mmrelay auth login` again to re-authenticate.

### Files Created

**`~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`** - Contains your Matrix session:

```json
{
  "homeserver": "https://matrix.example.org",
  "user_id": "@mmrelay-bot:matrix.example.org",
  "access_token": "your_access_token_here",
  "device_id": "MMRELAY_ABC123DEF"
}
```

**`~/.mmrelay/store/`** - Directory containing encryption keys and device information (multiple database files).

## How It Works

### Automatic Encryption Detection

MMRelay automatically detects room encryption status:

- **Encrypted rooms**: Messages are automatically encrypted before sending
- **Unencrypted rooms**: Messages are sent as normal plaintext
- **Mixed environments**: Each room is handled according to its encryption status

### Device Management

MMRelay manages encryption devices automatically:

- **Consistent Device ID**: Maintains the same device identity across restarts
- **Key Storage**: Encryption keys are stored securely in `~/.mmrelay/store/`
- **Automatic Key Sharing**: When the bot sees an encrypted message it can't read, it automatically requests the necessary keys from other clients in the room.
- **Device Trust**: Uses `ignore_unverified_devices=True` for reliable operation
- **Key Upload**: Automatically uploads encryption keys when needed

### Message Flow

1. **Outgoing Messages** (Meshtastic → Matrix):
   - MMRelay receives message from Meshtastic device
   - Checks if target Matrix room is encrypted
   - If encrypted: Encrypts message using room's encryption keys
   - Sends encrypted message to Matrix room

2. **Incoming Messages** (Matrix → Meshtastic):
   - MMRelay receives an encrypted message from a Matrix room.
   - If it cannot be decrypted, the bot automatically requests the key.
   - On a subsequent sync, the bot receives the key and decrypts the message.
   - Forwards decrypted message to Meshtastic device.

## File Locations

### Configuration Files

- **Main Config**: `~/.mmrelay/config.yaml`
- **E2EE Credentials**: `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json`
- **Encryption Store**: `~/.mmrelay/store/` (directory)

### Credentials File Format

The `credentials.json` file contains:

```json
{
  "homeserver": "https://your-matrix-server.org",
  "user_id": "@your-bot:your-matrix-server.org",
  "access_token": "your_access_token_here",
  "device_id": "MMRELAY_DEVICE_ID"
}
```

**Important**: Keep this file secure as it contains your Matrix access credentials.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

#### "E2EE features not available on Windows"

**Problem**: E2EE features don't work on Windows even with `mmrelay auth login`.

**Explanation**: E2EE requires the `python-olm` library, which depends on native C libraries that are difficult to compile on Windows.

**Solutions**:

- **Use Linux or macOS** for full E2EE support
- **On Windows**: `mmrelay auth login` still works for regular Matrix communication (recommended)
- **Alternative**: Configure password-based authentication in `config.yaml`:
  ```yaml
  matrix:
    homeserver: https://your-matrix-server.org
    password: your_matrix_password
    bot_user_id: @yourbot:your-matrix-server.org
  ```

This method automatically creates secure credentials.json and is compatible with Matrix 2.0/MAS. Use `mmrelay auth login` for the most secure interactive setup.

**Note**: Credentials created with `mmrelay auth login` on Windows will work with E2EE if you later use them on Linux/macOS.

#### "No E2EE dependencies found"

**Solution**: Install E2EE dependencies (Linux/macOS only):

```bash
pipx install 'mmrelay[e2e]'
```

#### "Failed to decrypt event" error in logs

**Problem**: You see `ERROR Matrix: Failed to decrypt event...` in your logs.

**Explanation**: This is usually normal, temporary behavior. It happens when another user sends a message in an encrypted room and the relay doesn't have the decryption key for it yet.

**Solution**:

- **Wait**: The relay will automatically request the key in the background. The message should be successfully decrypted within the next minute during the next sync from the server.
- **If the error persists for a long time**: This might indicate a de-synchronized session. The best way to fix this is to regenerate your credentials and key store.

  ```bash
  # Remove old credentials and store
  rm ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json
  rm -rf ~/.mmrelay/store/

  # Create new credentials
  mmrelay auth login
  ```

### Verification and Testing

#### Check E2EE Status

Look for these log messages when MMRelay starts:

```bash
INFO Matrix: Found credentials at ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json
INFO Matrix: Using device ID: YOUR_DEVICE_ID
INFO Matrix: Setting up End-to-End Encryption...
INFO Matrix: Encryption keys uploaded successfully
INFO Matrix: Performing initial sync to initialize rooms...
INFO Matrix: Initial sync completed. Found X rooms.
```

#### Verify Message Encryption

In your Matrix client (Element, etc.):

- **Encrypted messages**: Show with a lock icon or green shield.
- **Unencrypted messages**: Show with a red shield and "Not encrypted" warning.

If messages from MMRelay show as unencrypted in encrypted rooms, check your MMRelay version and configuration.

## Security Considerations

### Device Verification

MMRelay uses `ignore_unverified_devices=True` for automated bot operation:

- Interactive device verification is not practical for automated bots
- This setting allows reliable operation while maintaining encryption

### Key Storage

- Encryption keys are stored in `~/.mmrelay/store/`
- This directory should be backed up to preserve encryption history
- Protect this directory with appropriate file permissions
- Consider encrypting the filesystem where this directory is stored

### Access Control

- The `credentials.json` file contains sensitive authentication data
- Limit access to this file to the user running MMRelay
- Consider using environment variables for additional security

## Backward Compatibility

E2EE support is fully backward compatible:

- **Existing setups**: Continue to work without changes
- **Mixed environments**: Can handle both encrypted and unencrypted rooms
- **Optional feature**: E2EE can be disabled by setting `e2ee.enabled: false`

## Technical Details

### Implementation

- Uses matrix-nio library with Olm/Megolm encryption protocols
- E2EE store loaded before sync operations for proper initialization
- Automatic key management with `ignore_unverified_devices=True`

## Docker E2EE Setup

MMRelay supports E2EE in Docker environments using environment variables for easy configuration.

### Prerequisites

- **Linux/macOS host**: E2EE is not supported on Windows due to library limitations
- **E2EE-enabled image**: Use the official image `ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:latest`

### Quick Docker E2EE Setup

#### Method 1: Auth System + Docker (Recommended)

For complete Docker E2EE setup instructions with environment variables for operational settings, see the [Docker Guide E2EE Setup section](DOCKER.md#method-1-auth-system--environment-variables-recommended-for-e2ee).

#### Method 2: Mount Credentials File

```bash
# On host: Create credentials using auth login
mmrelay auth login

# Then mount the credentials file
```

```yaml
volumes:
  - ${MMRELAY_HOME}/.mmrelay:/app/data # Includes config.yaml, credentials.json, and E2EE store
```

### Configuration

Ensure E2EE is enabled in your `config.yaml`:

```yaml
matrix:
  e2ee:
    enabled: true
```

The E2EE store directory is automatically created in the mounted data volume.

For complete Docker setup instructions, see the [Docker Guide](DOCKER.md#method-1-auth-system--environment-variables-recommended-for-e2ee).

### Performance Impact

E2EE adds minimal overhead:

- **Startup time**: Slightly longer due to key synchronization
- **Message latency**: Negligible encryption/decryption time
- **Memory usage**: Small increase for key storage
- **Network usage**: Additional sync traffic for key management

For questions or issues with E2EE support, please check the [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/issues) or create a new issue with the `e2ee` label.
