docs/HELM.md, before:

# Helm Chart Deployment Guide

This guide covers deploying MMRelay using the Helm chart in `deploy/helm/mmrelay/`.

> **Note**: The Helm chart is a thin renderer of the static manifests in `deploy/k8s/`. It does **not** change the runtime model. Both use MMRELAY_HOME=/data, a single persistent root at `/data`, config mounted at `/data/config.yaml`, and the same probes/lifecycle behavior.

## Prerequisites

- Kubernetes cluster (v1.20+)
- Helm 3.x
- `kubectl` configured for your cluster

## Upgrading to 1.3

If you are upgrading from 1.2.x or earlier, read and follow
`docs/MIGRATION_1.3.md` before deploying or upgrading the Helm release.
New installations can proceed with the Quick Start below.

## Quick Start

### 1. Get the chart (git checkout)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay.git mmrelay
cd mmrelay
```

### 2. Create config.yaml

```bash
curl -Lo config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml
# Edit config.yaml with your settings
${EDITOR:-vi} config.yaml
```

### 3. Create the namespace

```bash
kubectl create namespace mmrelay
```

### 4. Create config Secret

```bash
kubectl create secret generic mmrelay-config \
  --from-file=config.yaml=./config.yaml \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

### 5. Install Chart

```bash
helm install mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --namespace mmrelay \
  --create-namespace
```

### 6. Verify Deployment

```bash
kubectl get pods -n mmrelay -l app.kubernetes.io/name=mmrelay
kubectl logs -n mmrelay -l app.kubernetes.io/name=mmrelay -f
```

## Configuration

The Helm chart is highly configurable. Key options include:

### Image Configuration

```yaml
image:
  repository: ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay
  tag: 1.3.0
  pullPolicy: IfNotPresent
  # Pin by digest for production (immutable)
  digest: ""
  # Image pull secrets for private registries
  pullSecrets: []
```

**Pin by tag:**

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set image.tag=1.3.0 \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

**Pin by digest (recommended for production):**

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set image.digest=sha256:abc123... \
  --set image.tag= \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

> **Note**: Tags can be mutable. For production, pin a specific tag or digest.

### Config Injection

The chart supports two patterns for injecting `config.yaml`:

#### Pattern A: Secret (Default)

```yaml
config:
  enabled: true
  source: secret
  name: mmrelay-config
  key: config.yaml
  create: false
  data: ""
```

Create the Secret externally (recommended default):

```bash
kubectl create secret generic mmrelay-config \
  --from-file=config.yaml=./config.yaml \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

#### Pattern B: ConfigMap

```yaml
config:
  enabled: true
  source: configmap
  name: mmrelay-config
  key: config.yaml
  create: false
  data: ""
```

Create the ConfigMap externally:

```bash
kubectl create configmap mmrelay-config \
  --from-file=config.yaml=./config.yaml \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

**Important**: Only enable one pattern at a time (Secret OR ConfigMap), not both.
**Required**: `config.enabled` must remain `true` (the chart fails if disabled).

#### Optional: Helm-created config (explicit opt-in)

To have Helm create the Secret/ConfigMap, you must set `create: true` and provide inline `data`. If `data` is empty, the chart will fail with a clear error to prevent deploying invalid resources.

```yaml
config:
  enabled: true
  source: secret
  name: mmrelay-config
  key: config.yaml
  create: true
  data: |
    # inline config.yaml contents
    matrix:
      homeserver: https://matrix.org
      bot_user_id: "@bot:matrix.org"
```

### Credentials Injection

MMRelay can use a pre-created `credentials.json` from a Secret (recommended for credential rotation):

```yaml
credentials:
  enabled: true
  secretName: mmrelay-credentials
  key: credentials.json
  create: false
  data: ""
```

Create the credentials Secret:

```bash
kubectl create secret generic mmrelay-credentials \
  --from-file=credentials.json=./credentials.json \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

#### Optional: Helm-created credentials (explicit opt-in)

```yaml
credentials:
  enabled: true
  secretName: mmrelay-credentials
  key: credentials.json
  create: true
  data: |
    { "homeserver": "https://matrix.org", "user_id": "@bot:matrix.org", "access_token": "..." }
```

#### Bootstrap Mode (Alternative)

For initial deployment without existing credentials, use Matrix auth environment variables:

```yaml
matrixAuth:
  enabled: true
  secretName: mmrelay-matrix-auth
```

Create the auth Secret:

```bash
kubectl create secret generic mmrelay-matrix-auth \
  --from-literal=MMRELAY_MATRIX_HOMESERVER=$(read -p "Matrix homeserver URL: "; echo "$REPLY") \
  --from-literal=MMRELAY_MATRIX_BOT_USER_ID=$(read -p "Matrix bot user ID: "; echo "$REPLY") \
  --from-literal=MMRELAY_MATRIX_PASSWORD=$(read -s -p "Matrix password: "; echo >&2; echo "$REPLY") \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

On first startup, MMRelay will:

1. Read Matrix credentials from environment variables
2. Log into Matrix
3. Create `/data/matrix/credentials.json` on the PVC
4. Use existing `credentials.json` on subsequent restarts

### Persistence

```yaml
persistence:
  enabled: true
  # Use existing PVC
  existingClaim: ""
  # Create new PVC with these settings
  storageClass: ""
  size: 1Gi
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
```

If `persistence.enabled=false`, the chart uses `emptyDir` for `/data`. **All state is ephemeral and will be lost on restart.** The initContainer chown step is automatically disabled in this mode.

**Use existing PVC:**

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set persistence.enabled=true \
  --set persistence.existingClaim=my-existing-pvc \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

**Create new PVC:**

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set persistence.enabled=true \
  --set persistence.storageClass=fast-ssd \
  --set persistence.size=5Gi \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

### Security Contexts

```yaml
podSecurityContext:
  fsGroup: 1000

containerSecurityContext:
  runAsUser: 1000
  runAsGroup: 1000
  runAsNonRoot: true
  allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
  readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
  capabilities:
    drop:
      - ALL
```

The chart uses a restrictive security posture by default. Only modify if required by specific features (e.g., serial device access).

### Health Probes

```yaml
probes:
  enabled: true
  readiness:
    initialDelaySeconds: 0
    periodSeconds: 10
    timeoutSeconds: 2
    failureThreshold: 3
  startup:
    initialDelaySeconds: 0
    periodSeconds: 5
    timeoutSeconds: 2
    failureThreshold: 60
  liveness:
    initialDelaySeconds: 0
    periodSeconds: 60
    timeoutSeconds: 20
    failureThreshold: 3
```

- **Readiness**: Checks for ready file at `/run/mmrelay/ready` (cheap, fast)
- **Startup**: Allows up to 5 minutes for initialization (60 failures × 5s = 300s)
- **Liveness**: Checks the ready file for recent updates

#### Ready-file heartbeat contract

The liveness probe checks ready-file freshness using `find -mmin -2`, which means the
application must update (touch) the ready file at least once every 2 minutes. If your
environment needs a longer heartbeat window, adjust the probe command or liveness
thresholds to avoid unintended restarts.

### Lifecycle Hooks

```yaml
lifecycle:
  enabled: true
  preStopSleepSeconds: 5
  terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 30
```

The preStop hook allows for a graceful shutdown period:

```bash
sleep 5
```

### Resources

```yaml
resources:
  requests:
    cpu: 50m
    memory: 128Mi
  limits:
    cpu: 500m
    memory: 512Mi
```

Adjust based on your workload:

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set resources.requests.cpu=100m \
  --set resources.limits.memory=1Gi \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

### Node Placement

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  node.kubernetes.io/instance-type: t3.medium

tolerations:
  - key: "workload"
    operator: "Equal"
    value: "mmrelay"
    effect: "NoSchedule"

affinity:
  podAntiAffinity:
    requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      - labelSelector:
          matchExpressions:
            - key: app.kubernetes.io/name
              operator: In
              values:
                - mmrelay
        topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname"
```

### Service (Optional)

```yaml
service:
  enabled: false
  type: ClusterIP
  port: 8080
```

MMRelay has no stable port by default. Enable service only if you have configured MMRelay to expose a port (e.g., for plugins).

### ServiceAccount

```yaml
serviceAccount:
  create: false
  annotations: {}
  name: ""
```

### Ingress (Optional)

```yaml
ingress:
  enabled: false
  className: ""
  annotations: {}
  hosts:
    - host: mmrelay.example.com
      paths:
        - path: /
          pathType: Prefix
  tls: []
```

### Network Policy (Optional)

The chart can render a NetworkPolicy matching `deploy/k8s/networkpolicy.yaml`. It
denies all ingress and allows all egress by default.

```yaml
networkPolicy:
  enabled: true
```

### Horizontal Pod Autoscaler

```yaml
autoscaling:
  enabled: false
  minReplicas: 1
  maxReplicas: 3
  targetCPUUtilizationPercentage: 80
  targetMemoryUtilizationPercentage: 80
```

> **Note**: MMRelay is stateful. Enable autoscaling only if you have configured state externalization (e.g., external database).

## Runtime Paths

The chart uses fixed runtime paths (consistent with container design):

- **MMRELAY_HOME**: `/data` (PVC mount)
- **Config Path**: `/data/config.yaml` (from Secret/ConfigMap)
- **Ready File**: `/run/mmrelay/ready` (for probes)
- **Tmp**: `/tmp` (emptyDir)
- **Run**: `/run/mmrelay` (emptyDir)

All persistent data lives under `/data`:

- `/data/matrix/credentials.json` - Matrix authentication
- `/data/database/meshtastic.sqlite` - SQLite database
- `/data/logs/` - Application logs
- `/data/matrix/store/` - E2EE encryption keys (if enabled)
- `/data/plugins/custom/` - Custom plugins
- `/data/plugins/community/` - Community plugins

## Running Doctor

Verify your deployment inside the pod:

```bash
POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods -n mmrelay -l app.kubernetes.io/name=mmrelay -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl exec -n mmrelay $POD_NAME -- mmrelay doctor
```

Expected output:

- HOME is `/data`
- No legacy environment variables
- All paths resolve under `/data`
- Database is accessible
- Credentials exist or can be created

## Upgrading

### Upgrade to 1.3.x

If upgrading from 1.2.x or earlier, follow `docs/MIGRATION_1.3.md` first.

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --namespace mmrelay \
  --set image.tag=1.3.0
```

### Rolling Restart

```bash
kubectl rollout restart deployment/mmrelay -n mmrelay
```

### Backup Before Upgrade

#### Understanding Data Locations

All MMRelay persistent data lives under `/data` inside the container:

```text
/data/
├── matrix/
│   ├── credentials.json   # Matrix authentication credentials
│   └── store/             # E2EE encryption keys (if enabled)
├── database/
│   └── meshtastic.sqlite  # SQLite database (nodes, messages, state)
├── logs/                  # Application logs
└── plugins/               # Custom and community plugins
    ├── custom/
    └── community/
```

The Helm chart stores all data in a PVC mounted at `/data`. Backing up this PVC preserves your complete MMRelay state.

#### Backup Methods

##### Method 1: PVC snapshot (recommended)

If your Kubernetes storage provider supports volume snapshots:

```bash
# Create a snapshot of the mmrelay-data PVC
kubectl create volumesnapshot mmrelay-data-backup-$(date +%Y%m%d) \
  --source=persistentvolumeclaim/mmrelay-data \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

Check your cloud provider's documentation for snapshot creation limits, retention policies, and restoration procedures.

##### Method 2: Exec-based backup (quick and simple)

```bash
# Get the pod name
POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods -n mmrelay -l app.kubernetes.io/name=mmrelay -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')

# Create a compressed backup
kubectl exec -n mmrelay $POD_NAME -- tar czf - /data > mmrelay-backup-$(date +%Y%m%d).tar.gz
```

##### Method 3: rsync backup (for larger deployments)

```bash
# Create a temporary pod with the PVC mounted
kubectl run backup-pod \
  --image=busybox:1.36 \
  --overrides='{
    "spec": {
      "containers": [{
        "name": "backup",
        "image": "busybox:1.36",
        "command": ["sleep", "3600"],
        "volumeMounts": [{
          "name": "data",
          "mountPath": "/data"
        }]
      }],
      "volumes": [{
        "name": "data",
        "persistentVolumeClaim": {
          "claimName": "mmrelay-data"
        }
      }]
    }
  }' \
  --namespace mmrelay

# Copy data from the temporary pod
kubectl cp -n mmrelay backup-pod:/data ./mmrelay-backup-$(date +%Y%m%d)

# Clean up the temporary pod
kubectl delete pod backup-pod -n mmrelay
```

For detailed restore procedures and disaster recovery guidance, see the [KUBERNETES.md](KUBERNETES.md#backup-restore-and-disaster-recovery) document.

## Troubleshooting

### Pod Not Ready

```bash
kubectl describe pod -n mmrelay <pod-name>
kubectl logs -n mmrelay <pod-name>
```

Check:

- Config Secret/ConfigMap exists and is mounted
- PVC is bound and accessible
- Security context allows writing to `/data`
- InitContainer completed successfully

### Ready File Missing

```bash
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- ls -l /run/mmrelay
kubectl logs -n mmrelay <pod-name> --tail=50
```

### Credentials Issues

```bash
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- ls -l /data/matrix/credentials.json
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- cat /data/config.yaml
```

If credentials don't exist, enable bootstrap mode or provide credentials via Secret.

### Database Issues

```bash
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- ls -l /data/database/meshtastic.sqlite
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- mmrelay doctor
```

### View Rendered Manifests

Debug Helm template rendering:

```bash
helm template mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --namespace mmrelay \
  > rendered.yaml
```

## Advanced Examples

### Serial Device Connection

Add serial device access with node pinning:

```yaml
extraVolumes:
  - name: serial-device
    hostPath:
      path: /dev/ttyUSB0
      type: CharDevice

extraVolumeMounts:
  - name: serial-device
    mountPath: /dev/ttyUSB0

nodeSelector:
  kubernetes.io/hostname: node-with-device

podSecurityContext:
  supplementalGroups:
    - 20
```

### External Secret Management

Use External Secrets Operator or Sealed Secrets:

```yaml
config:
  enabled: true
  source: secret
  name: mmrelay-config-external

credentials:
  enabled: true
  secretName: mmrelay-credentials-external
```

External secret manager creates Secrets with these names.

## Values Reference

For a complete list of configurable values, see `values.yaml` in the chart directory.

```bash
helm show values ./deploy/helm/mmrelay
```

## Migration from Static Manifests

If upgrading from `deploy/k8s/` static manifests to the Helm chart:

1. Backup your PVC: `kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod> -- tar czf - /data > backup.tar.gz`
2. Install Helm chart with existing PVC:
   ```bash
   helm install mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
     --set persistence.existingClaim=mmrelay-data \
     --namespace mmrelay
   ```
3. Delete static manifests: `kubectl delete -f deploy/k8s/`

The Helm chart uses the same PVC names, resources, and configuration as the static manifests.

## Security Considerations

- **Image Pinning**: Pin by digest for production to ensure immutability
- **Secrets**: Use external secret managers (External Secrets, Sealed Secrets, Vault)
- **Network Policy**: Optional; enable with `networkPolicy.enabled=true` (disabled by default)
- **Pod Security**: Security context is restrictive; only relax if required
- **RBAC**: No RBAC resources included by default (no cluster-wide access needed)

## Comparison: Helm vs Static Manifests

| Feature            | Helm Chart                  | Static Manifests (deploy/k8s/) |
| ------------------ | --------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| Configurability    | High (values.yaml)          | Manual (edit manifests)        |
| Version Management | `helm upgrade`              | `kubectl apply -k`             |
| Secret Management  | Flexible (Secret/ConfigMap) | Manual                         |
| PVC Management     | Dynamic or existing         | Manual                         |
| Probes & Lifecycle | Configurable                | Fixed                          |
| Recommended For    | Production, multi-env       | Simple deployments, debugging  |

Both implement the same container deployment model: MMRELAY_HOME=/data, PVC at /data, initContainer, probes, and lifecycle hooks.

## Support

For issues or questions:

- [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/issues)
- [Matrix Room](https://matrix.to/#/#mmrelay:matrix.org)
- [Documentation](https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/blob/main/docs/)

Commit message:

chore(helm): remove autoscaling configuration and HPA template
Autoscaling is not supported by this chart due to architectural constraints:
- MMRelay uses SQLite for persistence, which does not support concurrent access
- Meshtastic devices allow only one active client connection at a time

This change removes the HPA template and autoscaling values, and updates documentation
to clearly indicate that horizontal pod autoscaling is intentionally not supported,
preventing potential misconfiguration that could lead to database corruption or
connection conflicts.

docs/HELM.md, after:

# Helm Chart Deployment Guide

This guide covers deploying MMRelay using the Helm chart in `deploy/helm/mmrelay/`.

> **Note**: The Helm chart is a thin renderer of the static manifests in `deploy/k8s/`. It does **not** change the runtime model. Both use MMRELAY_HOME=/data, a single persistent root at `/data`, config mounted at `/data/config.yaml`, and the same probes/lifecycle behavior.

## Prerequisites

- Kubernetes cluster (v1.20+)
- Helm 3.x
- `kubectl` configured for your cluster

## Upgrading to 1.3

If you are upgrading from 1.2.x or earlier, read and follow
`docs/MIGRATION_1.3.md` before deploying or upgrading the Helm release.
New installations can proceed with the Quick Start below.

## Quick Start

### 1. Get the chart (git checkout)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay.git mmrelay
cd mmrelay
```

### 2. Create config.yaml

```bash
curl -Lo config.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/main/src/mmrelay/tools/sample_config.yaml
# Edit config.yaml with your settings
${EDITOR:-vi} config.yaml
```

### 3. Create the namespace

```bash
kubectl create namespace mmrelay
```

### 4. Create config Secret

```bash
kubectl create secret generic mmrelay-config \
  --from-file=config.yaml=./config.yaml \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

### 5. Install Chart

```bash
helm install mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --namespace mmrelay \
  --create-namespace
```

### 6. Verify Deployment

```bash
kubectl get pods -n mmrelay -l app.kubernetes.io/name=mmrelay
kubectl logs -n mmrelay -l app.kubernetes.io/name=mmrelay -f
```

## Configuration

The Helm chart is highly configurable. Key options include:

### Image Configuration

```yaml
image:
  repository: ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay
  tag: 1.3.0
  pullPolicy: IfNotPresent
  # Pin by digest for production (immutable)
  digest: ""
  # Image pull secrets for private registries
  pullSecrets: []
```

**Pin by tag:**

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set image.tag=1.3.0 \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

**Pin by digest (recommended for production):**

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set image.digest=sha256:abc123... \
  --set image.tag= \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

> **Note**: Tags can be mutable. For production, pin a specific tag or digest.

### Config Injection

The chart supports two patterns for injecting `config.yaml`:

#### Pattern A: Secret (Default)

```yaml
config:
  enabled: true
  source: secret
  name: mmrelay-config
  key: config.yaml
  create: false
  data: ""
```

Create the Secret externally (recommended default):

```bash
kubectl create secret generic mmrelay-config \
  --from-file=config.yaml=./config.yaml \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

#### Pattern B: ConfigMap

```yaml
config:
  enabled: true
  source: configmap
  name: mmrelay-config
  key: config.yaml
  create: false
  data: ""
```

Create the ConfigMap externally:

```bash
kubectl create configmap mmrelay-config \
  --from-file=config.yaml=./config.yaml \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

**Important**: Only enable one pattern at a time (Secret OR ConfigMap), not both.
**Required**: `config.enabled` must remain `true` (the chart fails if disabled).

#### Optional: Helm-created config (explicit opt-in)

To have Helm create the Secret/ConfigMap, you must set `create: true` and provide inline `data`. If `data` is empty, the chart will fail with a clear error to prevent deploying invalid resources.

```yaml
config:
  enabled: true
  source: secret
  name: mmrelay-config
  key: config.yaml
  create: true
  data: |
    # inline config.yaml contents
    matrix:
      homeserver: https://matrix.org
      bot_user_id: "@bot:matrix.org"
```

### Credentials Injection

MMRelay can use a pre-created `credentials.json` from a Secret (recommended for credential rotation):

```yaml
credentials:
  enabled: true
  secretName: mmrelay-credentials
  key: credentials.json
  create: false
  data: ""
```

Create the credentials Secret:

```bash
kubectl create secret generic mmrelay-credentials \
  --from-file=credentials.json=./credentials.json \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

#### Optional: Helm-created credentials (explicit opt-in)

```yaml
credentials:
  enabled: true
  secretName: mmrelay-credentials
  key: credentials.json
  create: true
  data: |
    { "homeserver": "https://matrix.org", "user_id": "@bot:matrix.org", "access_token": "..." }
```

#### Bootstrap Mode (Alternative)

For initial deployment without existing credentials, use Matrix auth environment variables:

```yaml
matrixAuth:
  enabled: true
  secretName: mmrelay-matrix-auth
```

Create the auth Secret:

```bash
kubectl create secret generic mmrelay-matrix-auth \
  --from-literal=MMRELAY_MATRIX_HOMESERVER=$(read -p "Matrix homeserver URL: "; echo "$REPLY") \
  --from-literal=MMRELAY_MATRIX_BOT_USER_ID=$(read -p "Matrix bot user ID: "; echo "$REPLY") \
  --from-literal=MMRELAY_MATRIX_PASSWORD=$(read -s -p "Matrix password: "; echo >&2; echo "$REPLY") \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

On first startup, MMRelay will:

1. Read Matrix credentials from environment variables
2. Log into Matrix
3. Create `/data/matrix/credentials.json` on the PVC
4. Use existing `credentials.json` on subsequent restarts

### Persistence

```yaml
persistence:
  enabled: true
  # Use existing PVC
  existingClaim: ""
  # Create new PVC with these settings
  storageClass: ""
  size: 1Gi
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
```

If `persistence.enabled=false`, the chart uses `emptyDir` for `/data`. **All state is ephemeral and will be lost on restart.** The initContainer chown step is automatically disabled in this mode.

**Use existing PVC:**

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set persistence.enabled=true \
  --set persistence.existingClaim=my-existing-pvc \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

**Create new PVC:**

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set persistence.enabled=true \
  --set persistence.storageClass=fast-ssd \
  --set persistence.size=5Gi \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

### Security Contexts

```yaml
podSecurityContext:
  fsGroup: 1000

containerSecurityContext:
  runAsUser: 1000
  runAsGroup: 1000
  runAsNonRoot: true
  allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
  readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
  capabilities:
    drop:
      - ALL
```

The chart uses a restrictive security posture by default. Only modify if required by specific features (e.g., serial device access).

### Health Probes

```yaml
probes:
  enabled: true
  readiness:
    initialDelaySeconds: 0
    periodSeconds: 10
    timeoutSeconds: 2
    failureThreshold: 3
  startup:
    initialDelaySeconds: 0
    periodSeconds: 5
    timeoutSeconds: 2
    failureThreshold: 60
  liveness:
    initialDelaySeconds: 0
    periodSeconds: 60
    timeoutSeconds: 20
    failureThreshold: 3
```

- **Readiness**: Checks for ready file at `/run/mmrelay/ready` (cheap, fast)
- **Startup**: Allows up to 5 minutes for initialization (60 failures × 5s = 300s)
- **Liveness**: Checks the ready file for recent updates

#### Ready-file heartbeat contract

The liveness probe checks ready-file freshness using `find -mmin -2`, which means the
application must update (touch) the ready file at least once every 2 minutes. If your
environment needs a longer heartbeat window, adjust the probe command or liveness
thresholds to avoid unintended restarts.

### Lifecycle Hooks

```yaml
lifecycle:
  enabled: true
  preStopSleepSeconds: 5
  terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 30
```

The preStop hook allows for a graceful shutdown period:

```bash
sleep 5
```

### Resources

```yaml
resources:
  requests:
    cpu: 50m
    memory: 128Mi
  limits:
    cpu: 500m
    memory: 512Mi
```

Adjust based on your workload:

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --set resources.requests.cpu=100m \
  --set resources.limits.memory=1Gi \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

### Node Placement

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  node.kubernetes.io/instance-type: t3.medium

tolerations:
  - key: "workload"
    operator: "Equal"
    value: "mmrelay"
    effect: "NoSchedule"

affinity:
  podAntiAffinity:
    requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
      - labelSelector:
          matchExpressions:
            - key: app.kubernetes.io/name
              operator: In
              values:
                - mmrelay
        topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname"
```

### Service (Optional)

```yaml
service:
  enabled: false
  type: ClusterIP
  port: 8080
```

MMRelay has no stable port by default. Enable service only if you have configured MMRelay to expose a port (e.g., for plugins).

### ServiceAccount

```yaml
serviceAccount:
  create: false
  annotations: {}
  name: ""
```

### Ingress (Optional)

```yaml
ingress:
  enabled: false
  className: ""
  annotations: {}
  hosts:
    - host: mmrelay.example.com
      paths:
        - path: /
          pathType: Prefix
  tls: []
```

### Network Policy (Optional)

The chart can render a NetworkPolicy matching `deploy/k8s/networkpolicy.yaml`. It
denies all ingress and allows all egress by default.

```yaml
networkPolicy:
  enabled: true
```

### No Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA)

This chart **does not support autoscaling** and intentionally omits an HPA template.

**Reasons:**

1. **SQLite database**: MMRelay uses SQLite for persistence. SQLite is a file-based database that does not support concurrent access from multiple processes. Multiple replicas would corrupt the database.

2. **Meshtastic device connections**: Each Meshtastic device allows only one active client connection at a time. Multiple relay instances connecting to the same device would cause connection conflicts.

## Runtime Paths

The chart uses fixed runtime paths (consistent with container design):

- **MMRELAY_HOME**: `/data` (PVC mount)
- **Config Path**: `/data/config.yaml` (from Secret/ConfigMap)
- **Ready File**: `/run/mmrelay/ready` (for probes)
- **Tmp**: `/tmp` (emptyDir)
- **Run**: `/run/mmrelay` (emptyDir)

All persistent data lives under `/data`:

- `/data/matrix/credentials.json` - Matrix authentication
- `/data/database/meshtastic.sqlite` - SQLite database
- `/data/logs/` - Application logs
- `/data/matrix/store/` - E2EE encryption keys (if enabled)
- `/data/plugins/custom/` - Custom plugins
- `/data/plugins/community/` - Community plugins

## Running Doctor

Verify your deployment inside the pod:

```bash
POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods -n mmrelay -l app.kubernetes.io/name=mmrelay -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl exec -n mmrelay $POD_NAME -- mmrelay doctor
```

Expected output:

- HOME is `/data`
- No legacy environment variables
- All paths resolve under `/data`
- Database is accessible
- Credentials exist or can be created

## Upgrading

### Upgrade to 1.3.x

If upgrading from 1.2.x or earlier, follow `docs/MIGRATION_1.3.md` first.

```bash
helm upgrade mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --namespace mmrelay \
  --set image.tag=1.3.0
```

### Rolling Restart

```bash
kubectl rollout restart deployment/mmrelay -n mmrelay
```

### Backup Before Upgrade

#### Understanding Data Locations

All MMRelay persistent data lives under `/data` inside the container:

```text
/data/
├── matrix/
│   ├── credentials.json   # Matrix authentication credentials
│   └── store/             # E2EE encryption keys (if enabled)
├── database/
│   └── meshtastic.sqlite  # SQLite database (nodes, messages, state)
├── logs/                  # Application logs
└── plugins/               # Custom and community plugins
    ├── custom/
    └── community/
```

The Helm chart stores all data in a PVC mounted at `/data`. Backing up this PVC preserves your complete MMRelay state.

#### Backup Methods

##### Method 1: PVC snapshot (recommended)

If your Kubernetes storage provider supports volume snapshots:

```bash
# Create a snapshot of the mmrelay-data PVC
kubectl create volumesnapshot mmrelay-data-backup-$(date +%Y%m%d) \
  --source=persistentvolumeclaim/mmrelay-data \
  --namespace mmrelay
```

Check your cloud provider's documentation for snapshot creation limits, retention policies, and restoration procedures.

##### Method 2: Exec-based backup (quick and simple)

```bash
# Get the pod name
POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods -n mmrelay -l app.kubernetes.io/name=mmrelay -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')

# Create a compressed backup
kubectl exec -n mmrelay $POD_NAME -- tar czf - /data > mmrelay-backup-$(date +%Y%m%d).tar.gz
```

##### Method 3: rsync backup (for larger deployments)

```bash
# Create a temporary pod with the PVC mounted
kubectl run backup-pod \
  --image=busybox:1.36 \
  --overrides='{
    "spec": {
      "containers": [{
        "name": "backup",
        "image": "busybox:1.36",
        "command": ["sleep", "3600"],
        "volumeMounts": [{
          "name": "data",
          "mountPath": "/data"
        }]
      }],
      "volumes": [{
        "name": "data",
        "persistentVolumeClaim": {
          "claimName": "mmrelay-data"
        }
      }]
    }
  }' \
  --namespace mmrelay

# Copy data from the temporary pod
kubectl cp -n mmrelay backup-pod:/data ./mmrelay-backup-$(date +%Y%m%d)

# Clean up the temporary pod
kubectl delete pod backup-pod -n mmrelay
```

For detailed restore procedures and disaster recovery guidance, see the [KUBERNETES.md](KUBERNETES.md#backup-restore-and-disaster-recovery) document.

## Troubleshooting

### Pod Not Ready

```bash
kubectl describe pod -n mmrelay <pod-name>
kubectl logs -n mmrelay <pod-name>
```

Check:

- Config Secret/ConfigMap exists and is mounted
- PVC is bound and accessible
- Security context allows writing to `/data`
- InitContainer completed successfully

### Ready File Missing

```bash
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- ls -l /run/mmrelay
kubectl logs -n mmrelay <pod-name> --tail=50
```

### Credentials Issues

```bash
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- ls -l /data/matrix/credentials.json
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- cat /data/config.yaml
```

If credentials don't exist, enable bootstrap mode or provide credentials via Secret.

### Database Issues

```bash
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- ls -l /data/database/meshtastic.sqlite
kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod-name> -- mmrelay doctor
```

### View Rendered Manifests

Debug Helm template rendering:

```bash
helm template mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
  --namespace mmrelay \
  > rendered.yaml
```

## Advanced Examples

### Serial Device Connection

Add serial device access with node pinning:

```yaml
extraVolumes:
  - name: serial-device
    hostPath:
      path: /dev/ttyUSB0
      type: CharDevice

extraVolumeMounts:
  - name: serial-device
    mountPath: /dev/ttyUSB0

nodeSelector:
  kubernetes.io/hostname: node-with-device

podSecurityContext:
  supplementalGroups:
    - 20
```

### External Secret Management

Use External Secrets Operator or Sealed Secrets:

```yaml
config:
  enabled: true
  source: secret
  name: mmrelay-config-external

credentials:
  enabled: true
  secretName: mmrelay-credentials-external
```

External secret manager creates Secrets with these names.

## Values Reference

For a complete list of configurable values, see `values.yaml` in the chart directory.

```bash
helm show values ./deploy/helm/mmrelay
```

## Migration from Static Manifests

If upgrading from `deploy/k8s/` static manifests to the Helm chart:

1. Backup your PVC: `kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod> -- tar czf - /data > backup.tar.gz`
2. Install Helm chart with existing PVC:
   ```bash
   helm install mmrelay ./deploy/helm/mmrelay \
     --set persistence.existingClaim=mmrelay-data \
     --namespace mmrelay
   ```
3. Delete static manifests: `kubectl delete -f deploy/k8s/`

The Helm chart uses the same PVC names, resources, and configuration as the static manifests.

## Security Considerations

- **Image Pinning**: Pin by digest for production to ensure immutability
- **Secrets**: Use external secret managers (External Secrets, Sealed Secrets, Vault)
- **Network Policy**: Optional; enable with `networkPolicy.enabled=true` (disabled by default)
- **Pod Security**: Security context is restrictive; only relax if required
- **RBAC**: No RBAC resources included by default (no cluster-wide access needed)

## Comparison: Helm vs Static Manifests

| Feature            | Helm Chart                  | Static Manifests (deploy/k8s/) |
| ------------------ | --------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| Configurability    | High (values.yaml)          | Manual (edit manifests)        |
| Version Management | `helm upgrade`              | `kubectl apply -k`             |
| Secret Management  | Flexible (Secret/ConfigMap) | Manual                         |
| PVC Management     | Dynamic or existing         | Manual                         |
| Probes & Lifecycle | Configurable                | Fixed                          |
| Recommended For    | Production, multi-env       | Simple deployments, debugging  |

Both implement the same container deployment model: MMRELAY_HOME=/data, PVC at /data, initContainer, probes, and lifecycle hooks.

## Support

For issues or questions:

- [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/issues)
- [Matrix Room](https://matrix.to/#/#mmrelay:matrix.org)
- [Documentation](https://github.com/jeremiah-k/meshtastic-matrix-relay/blob/main/docs/)
