docs/MIGRATION_1.3.md, before:

# Migration Guide for v1.3

This guide helps you upgrade from any legacy layout to the v1.3 unified HOME model.

## What Changed in 1.3

MMRelay now uses a single MMRELAY_HOME root for all runtime state:

> **Deprecation Note**: Legacy credential/location fallback is supported until v1.4; warnings will be emitted until you migrate. Plan to migrate before upgrading to v1.4.

- Credentials (moved to `matrix/` subdirectory)
- Database (moved to `database/` subdirectory)
- Logs (moved to `logs/` subdirectory)
- E2EE store (moved to `matrix/store/` subdirectory)
- Plugins (moved to `plugins/` subdirectory)

## New Directory Structure

After migration, your MMRELAY_HOME follows this layout:

```text
~/.mmrelay/  (or /data in containers)
├── config.yaml              # User configuration (optional, can be elsewhere)
├── matrix/                  # Matrix runtime artifacts
│   ├── credentials.json    # Matrix authentication credentials
│   └── store/              # E2EE encryption keys (Unix/macOS only)
├── database/
│   └── meshtastic.sqlite  # SQLite database (with -wal, -shm)
├── logs/
│   └── mmrelay.log          # Application logs
└── plugins/
    ├── core/              # Built-in plugins (read-only, in package)
    ├── custom/            # User plugins
    │   └── <plugin-name>/
    └── community/         # Third-party plugins
        └── <plugin-name>/
```

For containers, the canonical model remains:

- `MMRELAY_HOME=/data`
- Config mounted at `/data/config.yaml`

## Before Upgrading

1. Back up your current MMRELAY_HOME (or the location you use today for MMRelay data).
2. Ensure you can restore the backup.
3. Run a read-only preview: `mmrelay migrate --dry-run`.
4. If you are containerized, make sure you have a single persistent root.

### Credentials Compatibility Notes

- v1.3 can migrate legacy credentials from:
  - `MMRELAY_HOME/credentials.json` (expected legacy location)
  - `~/credentials.json` (legacy fallback; only when file looks like valid Matrix credentials)
- For safety, home-root fallback migration validates required keys before moving files:
  - `homeserver`
  - `access_token`
  - `user_id`

If your credentials are missing or malformed, run `mmrelay auth login` again to regenerate.

## Upgrade Steps (All Deployments)

1. Stop MMRelay.
2. Upgrade the package or container image to 1.3.
3. Run `mmrelay migrate` to move legacy data into MMRELAY_HOME.
4. Start MMRelay.

Migration in v1.3 uses **move semantics** by default: legacy files are moved to the new structure and removed from their original locations to prevent duplicates.

To ensure safety and atomicity, the migration process follows a **staged move pattern**:

1. Each unit (config, credentials, etc.) is first moved to a temporary staging directory (`MMRELAY_HOME/.migration_staging/`).
2. The staged data is validated for integrity.
3. Upon successful validation, the unit is atomically renamed to its final destination in `MMRELAY_HOME`.

If a destination file already exists, a timestamped backup is **always** created before it is overwritten. These backups are stored in a dedicated directory: `MMRELAY_HOME/.migration_backups/`.

If you need to overwrite existing target files, use `mmrelay migrate --force`. Note that even with `--force`, safety backups of your existing destination data are still created.

## Deployment-Specific Migration Quick Reference

### Local / systemd / venv installs

1. Upgrade package to 1.3.0.
2. Run:
   - `mmrelay migrate --dry-run`
   - `mmrelay migrate`
   - `mmrelay verify-migration`

### Docker Compose installs

See [Docker-Specific Notes](#docker-specific-notes) for detailed instructions.

### Kubernetes / Helm installs

See [Kubernetes-Specific Notes](#kubernetes-specific-notes) for detailed instructions.

### Migration Command Flags

- `--dry-run`: Preview migration actions without changing files. Recommended before applying changes.
- `--force`: Allow overwriting existing files in `MMRELAY_HOME` (backups are still created). Use only after verifying your backups.

## After Upgrading

1. Run `mmrelay verify-migration` (read-only) to confirm the unified layout.
2. If verification fails, keep MMRelay stopped until you resolve the warnings.

## How to Verify Success

Use the new verification command:

```bash
mmrelay verify-migration
```

This command:

- Prints the resolved MMRELAY_HOME
- Lists credentials, database, E2EE store, and logs paths
- Includes plugins and database directory checks
- Detects legacy data outside MMRELAY_HOME

Exit code semantics:

- `0`: Unified-home is clean (no legacy data, no split roots, credentials present)
- non-zero: Stop and fix before running live (missing credentials or legacy data present)

You can also run:

```bash
mmrelay doctor
```

This prints human-readable warnings when legacy data is still present.

### Legacy Layout Detection in HOME

When upgrading from v1.2, the `mmrelay doctor` command might detect v1.2 layout artifacts still within your HOME directory:

```text
📂 Legacy Layout in HOME (v1.2):
   ⚠️  credentials: ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json
   ⚠️  e2ee_store: ~/.mmrelay/store
```

This occurs when files are in the v1.2 locations (HOME root) instead of the v1.3 locations (`matrix/` subdirectory):

| v1.2 Location                 | v1.3 Location                        |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json` | `~/.mmrelay/matrix/credentials.json` |
| `~/.mmrelay/store/`           | `~/.mmrelay/matrix/store/`           |

These items will be automatically moved to the correct locations when you run `mmrelay migrate`. No manual action is required.

## How to Roll Back Safely (Manual)

If you need to manually undo a successful migration:

1. Stop MMRelay.
2. Restore your manual backup to the pre-upgrade location.
3. Downgrade the package or container image.
4. Start MMRelay.
5. Confirm the service starts and data is intact.

## Kubernetes-Specific Notes

1. Keep one PVC mounted at `/data`.
2. Keep config mounted at `/data/config.yaml`.
3. Deploy upgraded manifests/chart and verify in pod:
   - `kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod> -- mmrelay migrate --dry-run`
   - `kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod> -- mmrelay migrate`
   - `kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod> -- mmrelay verify-migration`

If verification fails, stop the rollout and restore your previous image and backup.

## Windows-Specific Notes

### Windows Installer Behavior

The Windows installer uses the installation directory (e.g., `C:\Users\<user>\AppData\Local\Programs\MM Relay\`) as the MMRELAY_HOME. All batch files created by the installer use `--home` to ensure consistent data locations:

- `mmrelay.bat` - Runs MMRelay with all data in the install directory
- `setup-auth.bat` - Sets up Matrix authentication
- `logout.bat` - Logs out from Matrix

### Default Paths Without Installer

If you installed via pip/pipx instead of the Windows installer, the default HOME location is:

```text
%LOCALAPPDATA%\mmrelay\
├── config.yaml
├── matrix\
│   └── credentials.json
├── database\
│   └── meshtastic.sqlite
├── logs\
└── plugins\
```

### Upgrading on Windows

1. **If using the Windows installer:**
   - Download and run the new installer
   - Your existing data in the install directory will be preserved
   - No migration is needed if all data was already in the install directory

2. **If upgrading from pip/pipx with data in `%LOCALAPPDATA%\mmrelay`:**
   - Install the new version
   - Open Command Prompt
   - Run migration to verify and move any legacy data:

   ```cmd
   mmrelay migrate --dry-run
   mmrelay migrate
   mmrelay verify-migration
   ```

3. **If you have data in both locations:**
   - The migration tool will detect this as a "split roots" condition
   - Review the output carefully before proceeding
   - Use `--dry-run` first to preview changes

### Windows-Specific Limitations

- **E2EE not supported**: Matrix End-to-End Encryption is not available on Windows due to library limitations. The `matrix/store/` directory is not created on Windows.
- **File-in-use errors**: Migration includes retry logic for Windows file locks (antivirus, Windows Indexer), but may still fail if files are actively in use. Close MMRelay before running migration.

## Docker-Specific Notes

1. Update compose to 1.3 model:
   - `MMRELAY_HOME=/data`
   - Use a single bind mount or volume at `/data`
   - config mounted at `/data/config.yaml`
   - reference examples:
     - prebuilt image (recommended): [`src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml`](../src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml)
     - build from source override: [`src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-override.yaml`](../src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-override.yaml)
     - environment template: [`src/mmrelay/tools/sample.env`](../src/mmrelay/tools/sample.env)
2. Ensure `.env` host path values are valid absolute paths.
3. Run migration inside container:
   - `docker compose exec mmrelay mmrelay migrate --dry-run`
   - `docker compose exec mmrelay mmrelay migrate`
   - `docker compose exec mmrelay mmrelay verify-migration`

If your deployment runs the app container as non-root and migration reports permission errors,
run one-off migration commands as root:

```bash
docker run --rm --user root \
  -v ${HOME}/.mmrelay:/data \
  -v ${HOME}/config.yaml:/data/config.yaml:ro \
  ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:<tag> \
  mmrelay migrate
```

After root-run migration, restore ownership on host files so normal runtime (non-root) can read/write:

```bash
sudo chown -R $(id -u):$(id -g) ~/.mmrelay
```

If verification fails, stop the container, restore your backup, and roll back to the previous image.

## Legacy Examples (Reference Only)

These examples are included only to help you recognize older setups.

### Legacy CLI Flags

<!-- MMRELAY_ALLOW_LEGACY_EXAMPLE -->

```bash
mmrelay --base-dir /opt/mmrelay
mmrelay --data-dir /var/lib/mmrelay
mmrelay --logfile /var/log/mmrelay.log
```

### Legacy Environment Variables

<!-- MMRELAY_ALLOW_LEGACY_EXAMPLE -->

```bash
export MMRELAY_BASE_DIR=/opt/mmrelay
export MMRELAY_DATA_DIR=/var/lib/mmrelay
export MMRELAY_CREDENTIALS_PATH=/opt/mmrelay/credentials.json
```

### Legacy Docker Compose

<!-- MMRELAY_ALLOW_LEGACY_EXAMPLE -->

```yaml
services:
  mmrelay:
    image: ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:1.2.9
    environment:
      - MMRELAY_BASE_DIR=/app/data
      - MMRELAY_CREDENTIALS_PATH=/app/data/credentials.json
    volumes:
      - /host/data:/app/data
      - /host/logs:/app/logs
```

Commit message:

fix: resolve late-binding lambda issues and improve robustness
- Fix lambda capture in migrate.py by using default arguments to avoid
  late-binding closure issues with shutil.move and unlink operations
- Add type checking in base_plugin.py before accessing config dicts
- Fix database_path in diagnostics to use get_database_path()
- Broaden platform detection to include all non-Windows systems
- Reset queue full log time on successful enqueue
- Use try/except/else pattern in get_e2ee_store_dir()
- Document move semantics in migration guide

docs/MIGRATION_1.3.md, after:

# Migration Guide for v1.3

This guide helps you upgrade from any legacy layout to the v1.3 unified HOME model.

## What Changed in 1.3

MMRelay now uses a single MMRELAY_HOME root for all runtime state:

> **Deprecation Note**: Legacy credential/location fallback is supported until v1.4; warnings will be emitted until you migrate. Plan to migrate before upgrading to v1.4.

- Credentials (moved to `matrix/` subdirectory)
- Database (moved to `database/` subdirectory)
- Logs (moved to `logs/` subdirectory)
- E2EE store (moved to `matrix/store/` subdirectory)
- Plugins (moved to `plugins/` subdirectory)

## New Directory Structure

After migration, your MMRELAY_HOME follows this layout:

```text
~/.mmrelay/  (or /data in containers)
├── config.yaml              # User configuration (optional, can be elsewhere)
├── matrix/                  # Matrix runtime artifacts
│   ├── credentials.json    # Matrix authentication credentials
│   └── store/              # E2EE encryption keys (Unix/macOS only)
├── database/
│   └── meshtastic.sqlite  # SQLite database (with -wal, -shm)
├── logs/
│   └── mmrelay.log          # Application logs
└── plugins/
    ├── core/              # Built-in plugins (read-only, in package)
    ├── custom/            # User plugins
    │   └── <plugin-name>/
    └── community/         # Third-party plugins
        └── <plugin-name>/
```

For containers, the canonical model remains:

- `MMRELAY_HOME=/data`
- Config mounted at `/data/config.yaml`

## Before Upgrading

1. Back up your current MMRELAY_HOME (or the location you use today for MMRelay data).
2. Ensure you can restore the backup.
3. Run a read-only preview: `mmrelay migrate --dry-run`.
4. If you are containerized, make sure you have a single persistent root.

### Credentials Compatibility Notes

- v1.3 can migrate legacy credentials from:
  - `MMRELAY_HOME/credentials.json` (expected legacy location)
  - `~/credentials.json` (legacy fallback; only when file looks like valid Matrix credentials)
- For safety, home-root fallback migration validates required keys before moving files:
  - `homeserver`
  - `access_token`
  - `user_id`

If your credentials are missing or malformed, run `mmrelay auth login` again to regenerate.

## Upgrade Steps (All Deployments)

1. Stop MMRelay.
2. Upgrade the package or container image to 1.3.
3. Run `mmrelay migrate` to move legacy data into MMRELAY_HOME.
4. Start MMRelay.

Migration in v1.3 uses **move semantics** by default: legacy files are moved to the new structure and removed from their original locations to prevent duplicates.

To ensure safety and atomicity, the migration process follows a **staged move pattern**:

1. Each unit (config, credentials, etc.) is first moved to a temporary staging directory (`MMRELAY_HOME/.migration_staging/`).
2. The staged data is validated for integrity.
3. Upon successful validation, the unit is atomically renamed to its final destination in `MMRELAY_HOME`.

If a destination file already exists, a timestamped backup is **always** created before it is overwritten. These backups are stored in a dedicated directory: `MMRELAY_HOME/.migration_backups/`.

If you need to overwrite existing target files, use `mmrelay migrate --force`. Note that even with `--force`, safety backups of your existing destination data are still created.

## Deployment-Specific Migration Quick Reference

### Local / systemd / venv installs

1. Upgrade package to 1.3.0.
2. Run:
   - `mmrelay migrate --dry-run`
   - `mmrelay migrate`
   - `mmrelay verify-migration`

### Docker Compose installs

See [Docker-Specific Notes](#docker-specific-notes) for detailed instructions.

### Kubernetes / Helm installs

See [Kubernetes-Specific Notes](#kubernetes-specific-notes) for detailed instructions.

### Migration Command Flags

- `--dry-run`: Preview migration actions without changing files. Recommended before applying changes.
- `--force`: Allow overwriting existing files in `MMRELAY_HOME` (backups are still created). Use only after verifying your backups.

> **Note**: Migration uses **move semantics by default** — source files are moved to the new location rather than copied. This prevents duplicate data and keeps the migration clean. Backups are always created before any overwrites.

## After Upgrading

1. Run `mmrelay verify-migration` (read-only) to confirm the unified layout.
2. If verification fails, keep MMRelay stopped until you resolve the warnings.

## How to Verify Success

Use the new verification command:

```bash
mmrelay verify-migration
```

This command:

- Prints the resolved MMRELAY_HOME
- Lists credentials, database, E2EE store, and logs paths
- Includes plugins and database directory checks
- Detects legacy data outside MMRELAY_HOME

Exit code semantics:

- `0`: Unified-home is clean (no legacy data, no split roots, credentials present)
- non-zero: Stop and fix before running live (missing credentials or legacy data present)

You can also run:

```bash
mmrelay doctor
```

This prints human-readable warnings when legacy data is still present.

### Legacy Layout Detection in HOME

When upgrading from v1.2, the `mmrelay doctor` command might detect v1.2 layout artifacts still within your HOME directory:

```text
📂 Legacy Layout in HOME (v1.2):
   ⚠️  credentials: ~/.mmrelay/credentials.json
   ⚠️  e2ee_store: ~/.mmrelay/store
```

This occurs when files are in the v1.2 locations (HOME root) instead of the v1.3 locations (`matrix/` subdirectory):

| v1.2 Location                 | v1.3 Location                        |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| `~/.mmrelay/credentials.json` | `~/.mmrelay/matrix/credentials.json` |
| `~/.mmrelay/store/`           | `~/.mmrelay/matrix/store/`           |

These items will be automatically moved to the correct locations when you run `mmrelay migrate`. No manual action is required.

## How to Roll Back Safely (Manual)

If you need to manually undo a successful migration:

1. Stop MMRelay.
2. Restore your manual backup to the pre-upgrade location.
3. Downgrade the package or container image.
4. Start MMRelay.
5. Confirm the service starts and data is intact.

## Kubernetes-Specific Notes

1. Keep one PVC mounted at `/data`.
2. Keep config mounted at `/data/config.yaml`.
3. Deploy upgraded manifests/chart and verify in pod:
   - `kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod> -- mmrelay migrate --dry-run`
   - `kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod> -- mmrelay migrate`
   - `kubectl exec -n mmrelay <pod> -- mmrelay verify-migration`

If verification fails, stop the rollout and restore your previous image and backup.

## Windows-Specific Notes

### Windows Installer Behavior

The Windows installer uses the installation directory (e.g., `C:\Users\<user>\AppData\Local\Programs\MM Relay\`) as the MMRELAY_HOME. All batch files created by the installer use `--home` to ensure consistent data locations:

- `mmrelay.bat` - Runs MMRelay with all data in the install directory
- `setup-auth.bat` - Sets up Matrix authentication
- `logout.bat` - Logs out from Matrix

### Default Paths Without Installer

If you installed via pip/pipx instead of the Windows installer, the default HOME location is:

```text
%LOCALAPPDATA%\mmrelay\
├── config.yaml
├── matrix\
│   └── credentials.json
├── database\
│   └── meshtastic.sqlite
├── logs\
└── plugins\
```

### Upgrading on Windows

1. **If using the Windows installer:**
   - Download and run the new installer
   - Your existing data in the install directory will be preserved
   - No migration is needed if all data was already in the install directory

2. **If upgrading from pip/pipx with data in `%LOCALAPPDATA%\mmrelay`:**
   - Install the new version
   - Open Command Prompt
   - Run migration to verify and move any legacy data:

   ```cmd
   mmrelay migrate --dry-run
   mmrelay migrate
   mmrelay verify-migration
   ```

3. **If you have data in both locations:**
   - The migration tool will detect this as a "split roots" condition
   - Review the output carefully before proceeding
   - Use `--dry-run` first to preview changes

### Windows-Specific Limitations

- **E2EE not supported**: Matrix End-to-End Encryption is not available on Windows due to library limitations. The `matrix/store/` directory is not created on Windows.
- **File-in-use errors**: Migration includes retry logic for Windows file locks (antivirus, Windows Indexer), but may still fail if files are actively in use. Close MMRelay before running migration.

## Docker-Specific Notes

1. Update compose to 1.3 model:
   - `MMRELAY_HOME=/data`
   - Use a single bind mount or volume at `/data`
   - config mounted at `/data/config.yaml`
   - reference examples:
     - prebuilt image (recommended): [`src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml`](../src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-prebuilt.yaml)
     - build from source override: [`src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-override.yaml`](../src/mmrelay/tools/sample-docker-compose-override.yaml)
     - environment template: [`src/mmrelay/tools/sample.env`](../src/mmrelay/tools/sample.env)
2. Ensure `.env` host path values are valid absolute paths.
3. Run migration inside container:
   - `docker compose exec mmrelay mmrelay migrate --dry-run`
   - `docker compose exec mmrelay mmrelay migrate`
   - `docker compose exec mmrelay mmrelay verify-migration`

If your deployment runs the app container as non-root and migration reports permission errors,
run one-off migration commands as root:

```bash
docker run --rm --user root \
  -v ${HOME}/.mmrelay:/data \
  -v ${HOME}/config.yaml:/data/config.yaml:ro \
  ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:<tag> \
  mmrelay migrate
```

After root-run migration, restore ownership on host files so normal runtime (non-root) can read/write:

```bash
sudo chown -R $(id -u):$(id -g) ~/.mmrelay
```

If verification fails, stop the container, restore your backup, and roll back to the previous image.

## Legacy Examples (Reference Only)

These examples are included only to help you recognize older setups.

### Legacy CLI Flags

<!-- MMRELAY_ALLOW_LEGACY_EXAMPLE -->

```bash
mmrelay --base-dir /opt/mmrelay
mmrelay --data-dir /var/lib/mmrelay
mmrelay --logfile /var/log/mmrelay.log
```

### Legacy Environment Variables

<!-- MMRELAY_ALLOW_LEGACY_EXAMPLE -->

```bash
export MMRELAY_BASE_DIR=/opt/mmrelay
export MMRELAY_DATA_DIR=/var/lib/mmrelay
export MMRELAY_CREDENTIALS_PATH=/opt/mmrelay/credentials.json
```

### Legacy Docker Compose

<!-- MMRELAY_ALLOW_LEGACY_EXAMPLE -->

```yaml
services:
  mmrelay:
    image: ghcr.io/jeremiah-k/mmrelay:1.2.9
    environment:
      - MMRELAY_BASE_DIR=/app/data
      - MMRELAY_CREDENTIALS_PATH=/app/data/credentials.json
    volumes:
      - /host/data:/app/data
      - /host/logs:/app/logs
```
